INTERVIEW CODE 06

Marta Basystiuk   0:54
This is very impressive and very helpful for our discussion. I always like to start the interview with a general question and it's up to you how specific or how broad you'd like to be. But the first question is about how, how do you assess the current state of the fundamental rights in Thailand right now and if you can provide.
A couple of examples in terms of the developments. It can be both either positive, negative that you feel is the most important to this topic. Please do include them.

INT08   1:26
Just to clarify a state of human rights in Thailand right now, right?

Marta Basystiuk   1:30
Yes, if you want to broaden it up to the rule of law, you can.

INT08   1:31
OK.
Hmm, yeah. Uh, yes. Uh. So I think I can tell. I can answer this few statistics. Uh.
Between 2014 and 2019, the first around five years of our founding, we represented around 30 to 40 cases per year, cases of political cases.
Of political prosecution. Then came the 2020 movement, primarily led by young people. We are talking about high school students, university students, middle schoolers event, and the number of political cases skyrocketed from 30 to 40 cases per year.
To 800 cases by the end of 2021, and I think that speaks to the intensity of political prosecution in light of the pro democracy movement since 2020 to today after the movement started in July 2020.
Almost 2000 people have been charged or prosecuted under various repressive laws, emergency decree back then during the COVID years, Las Majestas, Sedition, Public Assembly Act, Committed Crimes Act, you name it.
Today.
With the return of the civilian LED government after the 2023 general election, uh political prosecution unfortunately has not disappeared. That is to say, we have seen more than 100 new cases, including Uh cases under the Les Majeste law in under sedition.
Under the new civilian LED government. What's interesting, however, is that the number of new cases per month has decreased compared to the number of new cases under the previous administration before the 2023 general election.
So in that case, there's a bit of progress there. Authorities are charging fewer people, uh, under these progressive laws.
What changes, however, is the number of judgments coming down, being handed down by judges in the Criminal Court. So you can imagine all the cases that were brought that that led to prosecution.
Stemming from what happened in 20/20/2021, there was a backlog back then. So in 2023, 2024, 2025 and this year, those cases that started back then, judgments are slowly coming down now. So the number of judgments per month has increased significantly.
Heightening the risk of an increase in the number of political prisoners and so on and so forth. So the the way we look at the situation right now is that the the background for democracy has shifted from the streets to the courtroom, because right now most of these stuffs happened in the courtroom.
And we can talk more about this later is when it comes to issues with the judiciary, we have, we see quite a lot of issues with the judiciary in this regard.

Marta Basystiuk   4:50
That is excellent and very impressive work of your organization on defending so many people. And yeah, it's it's good that there is some positive improvements. What I'm hearing is that we can actually start with the civic and political rights unless you have other.
Preferences. Can you guide me please? Yep. OK, perfect. I will start with the first one in our list. It's on right to life, personal security and privacy.

INT08   5:11
I think we can stop there, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   5:23
Our data shows that there were some improvements in the protection of those three aspects of those rights, and in 2025 we also have a separate data point that more people say they feel safe walking in the neighborhood comparing to a few years ago.
Does this experience of the improvement in the enjoyment of right to life, security and and privacy align with with your experience and with your observations? And if so, why? And if not, why?

INT08   6:01
Right. So I don't think I have much information on right to life. I know some of my partner organizations, they work on the issue of death penalty and we are seeing an increased number of offenses punishable by death penalty. So there's more offenses that may lead to death penalty.

Marta Basystiuk   6:12
Mhm.

INT08   6:21
Entity than fewer offenses, so that's not a good development. But then again, I don't work on that issue, so I can't speak about that. When it comes to the issue of personal security and privacy, I can comment on the experiences of human rights defenders and those working in the field.

Marta Basystiuk   6:25
Mhm.

INT08   6:40
And for that specific group, I think they many times do feel that they are not very secure or that their private lives are not very protected when they decide to join the pro democracy movement.
I think you may have heard about the use of Pegasus spyware a few years back, for example, against human rights defenders in Thailand. I think that's one example. But we have the old school surveillance, having police officers monitoring, conducting surveillance on key activists in different.
Provinces. So in and we do have this in our harassment report, that's what we call it. Uh, just documenting cases of harassment reported to us by activists or ordinary citizens and quite a few of them would be.
Right before that's going to be a visit by an important political figure to, say, a province. Activists in that province would be visited by police officers asking them, for example, do you plan to do any activities when that politician is is visit, is going to visit?

Marta Basystiuk   7:50
Mhm.

INT08   7:50
Even even though some of them have already left activism or the movement for a while, we have police officers or authorities visiting people at schools, students at schools, at workplaces. So when it comes to.
Privacy security to them for for this group of people is still quite problematic and less so that I can't speak. And one thing that I can think of is.
Digital security or online privacy? And in that sense, I mean, I think many of the political figures are put under constant surveillance online on their social media platforms, not only by state actors, but also by non-state actors who would monitor what they say on social media.
Yeah, with the goal we observe of reporting those things to the police, they would take a screenshot and then they would say file a less majestic complaint with those people. And many times they do this quite systematically.
With having them having a form about that human rights offender filled out, sending it to that human rights offender and say if you don't, if you don't stay quiet, I have the all these evidence ready to be sent to the police. So we have seen quite a number of these forms sent to human rights offenders.
Of their address, their work address, their home address and other personal information that the these people said would be sent to the police if they continue to speak up about, say, the monarchy. Yeah, so those are the few things that come to mind when I think about personal security and privacy.

Marta Basystiuk   9:37
That's excellent.

INT08   9:37
Also there I think last year a few civil society actors, academics, activists, human rights organization including Thai Lawyers for Human Rights. It was found that our names were put on the high value target list of the military.
Which means we would be put under consent surveillance, but at the same time they would be carrying out online influence operations against us.

Marta Basystiuk   10:07
Can I please ask you to clarify who is gathering this personal information and putting them in forms and basically harassing defenders and other activists that they might send this information to the police or any other law enforcement? Who are those people? Are they from the state institutions?
Or.
They are just private.

INT08   10:30
So they're non state actors. They are private pro monarchy right wing groups that they they they tend to call themselves how do I say this like monarchy protector, the guardian of the monarchy. So there would be policing online content to see whether any.
Of the content fall far of the Let's Majestate law.

Marta Basystiuk   10:53
Mhm.
That's very helpful. Thank you. And since we've touched upon the topic on censorship, I'd like to go back a little bit to the freedom of expression. We are seeing some divergent between the perception of experts and general population when we ask them to assess the freedom of.
Of expression where experts tend to think that the situation has actually worsened in the past few years and then general population in contrast, they report improvements. What is your assessment of this right and and can you give us more?
Details why you think certain way, whether you support the experts opinion or the public general public opinion.

INT08   11:36
And.
Hmm.
That makes sense, actually. I think I I can see why there is such a divergent and I think, and I think that's because in general, when it comes to freedom of expression, it's quite all right unless and until you start speaking about quite controversial issues.
That the and the majority of people don't really talk about these issues, like less majestic, like monarchy reforms, like the military. They don't necessarily speak about these issues a lot. So it's usually only those who work in the movement, uh, the experts that would see the.
The regress while other people may see progress on this area and I think and I think it's it's that state of exception that makes freedom of expression not very well protected. And I think we get, you know, less majester if you take to the streets, if you criticize the king.
Criticize the military, for example, then that won't go very well. And the most recent trend, just a few weeks ago, a few months ago, is the use of slap law by politicians from quite prominent political.
Parties against ordinary citizens who criticize him. So again, now that, uh, I think that's that's a trend that we are quite worried about. And in terms of slapped, there's a, there's I wouldn't say a trend, but I'm concerned of the.
Possibility or probability of more transnational slap cases arising in the future. We are working on this case now brought by a Malaysian government against an Australian journalist slash academic residing in Thailand.

Marta Basystiuk   13:18
OK.

INT08   13:29
Mr. Murray Hunter. He writes commentary, critical commentary about corruption in Malaysia, about conflict of interest within the government in Malaysia, and the Malaysian government decided to send a representative to Thailand to file a criminal complaint, A defamation complaint against.
And simply by doing that, the Thai police would then conduct an investigation. They carry out an arrest and the prosecutor, the judge, they took on the rest of the matter. That is to say, it's a very low cost way for foreign government to come to Thailand to file criminal.
Defamation complaint against that critics living in Thailand and then the Thai authorities would take the rest, would take care of the rest. This is the first case we've seen in a while. I don't remember the last case I've seen that looks like this, but we are concerned that.
This would open the door to more transnational slap cases. You can imagine how journalists in Thailand who write about the Myanmar election, the Myanmar government can very easily do what the Malaysian government did. Same thing with Cambodia, with Vietnam, with the US, even if someone writes about Trump, for example.

Marta Basystiuk   14:44
Yeah, it's all the same, unfortunately, unfortunately. But we are here to rectify the situation. Since you mentioned this is an excellent example and thank you for mentioning this. I have two questions. We've had an interview with another expert and she also mentioned that there is a change in government and this new.

INT08   14:48
What?

Marta Basystiuk   15:04
Mentioned civic LED government. I would hope to be more progressive in that sense, but with this example of SLAP lawsuits, it seems like they are surveilling and then prosecuting those that are in the opposition, so they are.
Using the same tactics as the old, the former government, is that your perception to? OK. And then you mentioned that there is it's the first time of hopefully it won't be the trend. It won't open the door, but.
It might you you mentioned about the Australian professor. Do you think that there there are any other group in terms of nationality, ethnicity, any other social demographic factor that?
Are being limited when it comes to their freedoms, including the freedom of expression, including the freedom of assembly, of of any any other right that that we are, I mean equality discrimination. Do you think that that there is this different perception?

INT08   16:09
Hmm.

Marta Basystiuk   16:16
Perception. Let's say someone is a migrant and there there was the tension at the border. Yeah, I'm curious to to learn more about your perception of those developments.

INT08   16:28
So a few things. First, I think although we only see one case, the case against Australian Mr. Murray Hunter, I've already received reports that other foreign journalists in Thailand feel the chilling effect.
That comes from this case. So that's the first thing I want to point out. The second thing is, oh, that totally slipped my mind.

Marta Basystiuk   16:57
Yeah, about the groups that maybe are more affected than, let's say, regular citizens who are living in big cities in Bangkok. I I don't want to put words into your mouth. I'm just trying to raise my question.

INT08   17:05
Mm.
No, yeah, no, no. I thought of something just now. Uh, the two things I thought of the the Australian case and.
Uh, yes, the the draft law on associations and foundations. So maybe five years ago, six years ago, under the previous administration, they tried to pass the Thai version of the NGO law, basically.

Marta Basystiuk   17:21
Mhm.

INT08   17:33
Uh, that was during Thailand UPR year. So eventually they decided to shelve that law and it was never brought back. Uh. And then uh, recently we found out about the.
Draft law on associations and foundations that, if passed, would very heavily regulate associations and foundations, the legal forms taken by many civil society organizations.
And it would increase the.
The, for example, grounds on which foundations can be closed. For example, it would authorize warrantless search or inspection. It would, for example, allow the authorities to shut down foundations simply for failing to submit a financial report within 30.
Days. So if you submit it on the 31st day, that is a ground for dissolving the entire foundation. It would also give the authorities the power to replace the board of the foundation with with its own board.
In the event that the authorities find the previous board to be in violation of the law, for example. So again, and I think about this because the Myanmar groups and many non Thai groups are concerned about this law.
Primarily because there's also the nationality requirement for registering for starting a foundation or association.
And it would require, I don't remember the specific number, but it would require more people need to come together before they can register an association or foundation.
And there's also a provision that would require foundation and associations to basically have a big sign in front of their offices in order to tell the passes by the public where they are and where they're located. So you can imagine.
Myanmar human rights defenders setting up an organi a foundation in Thailand, not wanting to be easily located, but this law, if passed, would force all these organizations, especially the smaller ones, the ones that work on controversial issues, to publicly announce where they are.
So again, that that's a bit of a concern as well. But again, it hasn't been passed yet. It's still in the legislative pipeline. But in this campaign period, I've I've heard some politicians calling for another NGO law in Thailand.

Marta Basystiuk   20:13
That's a bit alarming. Oh, as you mentioned, chilling effect. Thank you for mentioning that. Now I'm debating whether to ask you a question about freedom of assembly or equal treatment or civics participation in general.
Maybe I will also touch upon about equal treatment, since you mentioned that there might be some potential privileges to citizens as opposed to those who are foreigners coming from other countries.
We are seeing, based on our data, that there is a gradual decline in public's confidence when it comes to equal treatment.
Do you agree with that assessment? Do you think that the the protections over equal treatment is worsening?

INT08   21:05
I don't think I have the data or information to comment on this question. When it if we were talk, if you were to talk about the general sentiment of the public, I think the issue of same-sex marriage comes into play quite a lot because Thailand recently legalized.

Marta Basystiuk   21:10
OK.

INT08   21:22
Same sex marriage. So usually people speak quite positively about this issue, but again, my knowledge on this issue is very limited. I don't really have the the data on this.

Marta Basystiuk   21:34
OK, then let's go back to freedom of assembly and association.
We are seeing finally improvements in the exercise of this rights and most respondents, they are saying that people can organize around issues, they can attend meetings, they can join political groups. Do you genuinely believe that people are able to organize, join groups and protest peacefully right now or do?
You think that there are some barriers, and what are those barriers? They can be legal, administrative, informal, whatever comes to your mind.

INT08   22:10
Hmm.
I think again, the answer depends on which issues you work on. If you work on students' rights, for example, on education, I think you get support from the authorities. You wouldn't face a lot of barriers, but if you start journeying into political issues like Les Majesta, like Democratic.
Reforms like reforms of the military, like refugees, for example, often seen and perceived by the state to be a national security issue. Then things get a bit trickier, starting from registering a foundation or an association. For example, we wrote a report to the EUCA country.
Focus report on Thailand and we look at the registration requirements for starting a foundation or an association in Thailand and even simple things like mentioning the word refugee in the name of the foundation. That is an easy way to get rejected, for example, so they can still work on the same thing.
Just need to not be so explicit about it in the name of the foundation and the way they Yep, go on.

Marta Basystiuk   23:15
Courage. Sorry. Yeah, please. I was just wondering why refugees are a matter of national security.

INT08   23:25
I think it's because of the country's proximity to Myanmar and the location of Thailand in the region whereby a lot of people want to come in the proof factor. And I think because of that, based on my experiences also working in a refugee field, it seems that the the issue of refugee is taking.
care of by the National Security Council as well, for example. So people in the national security sector in the government happen to also be taking care of the refugee issue, and that's why they see this issue through the national security lens.

Marta Basystiuk   24:03
Thank you. Thank you very much. I will now.

INT08   24:04
Yeah.
Yeah. So a lot of issues with the the registration requirements and then and then when it comes to actual demonstration to actual assemblies since 2020 and since 2014, but more so in 2020, I think we see a lot more protest and I think that's a good way for us to.
See how the state responds to those protests. And I think back in 2020 COVID years, emergency decree was heavily used to crack down on peaceful assemblies. We saw a lot of violent dispersals of peaceful protests.
The use of tear gas, the use of high pressure water cannons, the use of rubber bullets, even in public assemblies where children were clearly present. So again, that's something that is a bit of a worrying, especially when we talk about the what we call in Thailand crowd control police.
They were very popular among the activists back in the days because they would always come in with full gears, fully with helmets and and batons and shields. So again, those are the images people remember when they think of the crowd control police.

Marta Basystiuk   25:04
Mhm.
Thank you.
Thank you. I I feel like that was the perfect segue to start talking about public engagement. How do you think people in general feel they can influence decisions that affect their life?
And I'm curious about channels. What channels, in your opinion, actually help civic participation happen in practice? And it can be legal consultation, digital tools that you've mentioned, any community forums.
Um, yeah, anything that comes to your mind.

INT08   25:56
I can tell you about the shift in people's sentiment with regard to how much they can influence public decisions.
I think back in 2020 and 2021, I think there was a lot of optimism among the pro democracy, among those in the pro democracy movement that through making their voices heard on the street.
That changes would come and that's why I think we saw a lot of people taking to the streets in those years. I think after a lot of people, especially the protest leaders being charged, prosecuted, imprisoned, for example, one of the protest leaders who happens to also be a human rights lawyer, who is my colleague.
My friend, human rights lawyer Arnold Nampa has been sentenced to more than 29 years in prison in connection with multiple less majestic convictions, 10 less majestic convictions, and he still has four less majestic cases remaining in which courts have not issued verdict.
But I think when people think of the price one would have to pay for speaking out, they think of Anu Nampa. He's the symbol of the movement. So they think of this father of two young children being put behind bars for simply speaking for peaceful speeches or online comments.
So I think right now, and I think that's why right now you see a lot fewer protests. In fact, you don't see that many protests in Thailand compared to what you may have read about a few years back. And I think that's because people are really tired. They may feel like.
It wouldn't lead them anywhere, anyway, even if they took to the streets. But having said that, I think people are still interested in wanting to be a part of public decision making, but they just no longer choose protesting or demonstrating as a way to do so.
And they would find ways to be involved through formal channels like election. In the 2023 election, for example, the IT was unprecedented that the progressive Move Forward Party was able to win the most number of seats in parliament despite being a very new party.
Beating another party that never lost the election for two decades, for example, or when our partner organization, ILO ran a campaign to amend the Constitution because one of the root causes of today's rule of law issues is the 2017 Constitution draft.
by the military after the 2014 coup. And there was a referendum for this constitution back in 2016. But people who campaigned against the referendum again were charged and prosecuted for campaigning against the referendum. So right now we try to change this this constitution.
That we got and I think 2 two years ago, if I remember the year correctly, ILO ran a campaign collecting people's signatures to submit the amendment to the parliament.
And they were able to collect more than 200,000 physical physical signatures in just three days. I think people were really they they wanted to do something and we just need to give them that channel to do something about it like the 20 Twenty-three election.

Marta Basystiuk   29:15
Wow.

INT08   29:26
And.
When I think 10s of thousands of people volunteer to be election observers to help ILAW stand at different voting stations around the country to take photos as the ballots were being counted and then send them to ILAW, for example, I think when when given the opportunity, people still.
To do something, but they just know they're just, they feel a bit tired taking to the streets again and again and again. So we just need to give them something else that they can do.

Marta Basystiuk   29:55
That's excellent. And can I ask you what specific reforms or initiatives, if if you are aware of any, you are most hopeful for or optimistic about that concerns civic participation that you think is important to highlight for in our research?
It can concern civic space or it can concern any of the rights that we discussed.

INT08   30:15
As you.
I know there's an attempt to reform the Public Assembly Act, so especially after the COVID years, now that emergency emergency decree is no longer enforced, if they were, if the authorities were to regulate public assemblies, they would do so under the Public Assembly Act, which is quite problematic.
And I know there's an attempt to reform it. There's an attempt to reform the to to look at the SLAP issue as well. There were some anti SLAP bills proposed to parliament, but because of parliamentary dissolution back in back in December last.
Last month, all those bills left because the parliament was dissolved.
Another thing that we are looking at, and I think this would be a good, a very positive signal on the issue of civic participation and freedom of expression, is the issue of amnesty bill for victims of political prosecution. Obviously, ideally these people.
Shouldn't have been prosecuted to begin with, but we take the world as it is. The next best thing is to grant them amnesty so that they don't get prosecuted, put in prison for exercising their fundamental rights.
Last year we introduced People's Amnesty Bill. That's a bill from the civil society to Parliament. It was rejected by the House of Representatives because our bill included Les Majeste and that's like a taboo and no, no for many political parties.
But another version of Amnesty Buu did pass. It excluded Les Majeste, but quite a lot of people would still be included. People charged on an emergency decree, Computer Crimes Act, Public Assembly Act, sedition.
Uh, that bill again lapsed because of parliamentary dissolution last month. So now we need to keep a close eye on the election and and what happens post election because under the Constitution.
The new cabinet within 60 days can make a request to the parliament to bring back whatever bills that lapse because of parliamentary dissolution. So we need to see whether or not they would bring back that amnesty bill.
Either way, if they bring it back good, we could continue to advocate on it. If not, then we again would continue to advocate on introducing another amnesty bill to the parliament anyway. But again, that would set that would set zero for people who came out to speak peacefully about the about political issues.

Marta Basystiuk   33:03
Thank you and thank you for touching upon non governmental checks that we are also including as the indicator in civic participation and we are very interested in what civil society organizations like yours are doing to scrutinize.
Government actions, but also to help safeguard rights like the right for freedom of expression and assembly from the perspective of non governmental checks.
Do you think of any other constraints that affect your work the most? You've mentioned that there are some limitations as to what can be said, what can be included even in the name of the organization, but if you can think of any other constraints.
Informal, financial, legal.

INT08   33:59
I think financial is a big thing. I know there's an attempt to regulate foreign funding under the draft law on association and foundations. So it's not there yet because the law had the bill hasn't passed.
But again, but I mentioned funding because I think last year all civil society organizations around the world feel the impact of funding cuts from different parts of the world, from the US, from the EU, from from the UK for instance.
And high civil society has not been spared from the impact of that funding crisis. In fact, last year, many civil society organizations shut down. Many people were laid off because of the funding cuts. So I think that's another constraint that that that that comes.
To my mind.

Marta Basystiuk   34:55
And then, of course, political pressure. Can I ask personal? I'm sorry, Anna Marie, it doesn't relate to our interview per SE, but I'm really worried about your colleague and I I wish him all the best. And if there is anything we can do, please let us know. But do you also feel more pressure on your colleagues?
Is now very set the precedent of.
Are the defender being prosecuted for and jailed for a very long time? How do you cope with that as the civil society organization? Are you limiting the scope of your work to align it better with what is expected from?
State institutions or what is the way around to still move forward?

INT08   35:41
I think for us I can speak for Thai lawyers for human rights, but I think the same can be said about some other, a lot of other organizations too. But I think our job is to hold the line and I think we want to make sure that human rights offenders, activists know that we will be there if they choose to to speak up.
But I think that may not be enough to address the concerns and worries of many of these people. In fact, quite a lot of Thai activists, including protest leaders, have already fled Thailand. Many of them, many people who fled Thailand.
They were charged with Les Majeste in multiple cases, some more than 10 Les Majeste cases. So they felt that there's no future for them left in Thailand. And if they were to stay, they would only be spending their youth, their teenage years in prison, many of these people early 20s.
For example, still university students. And I think when project leaders start to leave, I think that sends a certain signal to people in the movement that it's risky to speak about these issues.
In fact, I've heard this phrase used that we're seeing a lot more refugees from Thailand, especially those charged with Las Majeste. And as we see more and more use of the Las Majeste law, we are concerned that.
As opposed to being a country to which refugees want to go, now a lot of people in Thailand are leaving the country because of political prosecution that Thailand might become a refugee exporting country.
Again, I don't want to say there's a trend there, but that's just looking at the numbers alone. There's a lot of people who have left Thailand in the past few years because of political prosecution.

Marta Basystiuk   37:40
Thank you so very much for all your work that you're doing. It's truly inspiring to me and I just feel like we are all a big community of those who are standing up for. I call it the right thing to do. So thank you for that. So we are already.
Took 40 minutes of your time and I just wanted to check in whether you are OK with maybe covering a few more questions in criminal justice or would you rather stop at this point because we don't want to take more of your time.

INT08   38:10
No, I think criminal justice is good. I think I have a lot to say that.

Marta Basystiuk   38:14
Oh, perfect. Thank you so much. Anna Marie, do you want to ask any questions about the rights that we covered? OK. OK. Thank you so very much. So criminal.

INT08   38:24
Oh, sorry, something came to mind. Right to life. The issue of Reformand.

Marta Basystiuk   38:27
Oh.
Oh, please explain.

INT08   38:32
Uh, sending refugees or dissidents back to their home countries where they face a real risk of right to life violation or other gross human rights violations. So right now Thailand has passed this new law.
Call the prevention and suppression of torture and enforced disappearance. And under this new law, section 13 says you can't send people back to countries where they face a real risk of torture or enforced disappearance.
Uh. But after the passage of the law, after the law comes into force, there's been a few cases. For example, the case against a the Uyghurs, 40 Uyghurs sent back to to China, to Xinjiang, China, for example, early last year, the case.
Of a Vietnamese human rights defender, Mr. Yi Quinh Badabh, who is now at risk of being sent back to Vietnam at the request of the Vietnamese authorities. And in in many of these cases, civil society actors try to invoke Section 13, the non-reformant principle under this new law.
And it hasn't been working. Judges say this decision whether to send people back, that's for the executive branch to make. That's that's not for the judicial branch to make despite section 13 of the law. So again, that's just something that comes to mind when when I think of right to life.

Marta Basystiuk   40:01
Thank you so much. I that's exactly where I put it. I put a note right to life. That's very important example. Thank you. Yes. And now let's move on to criminal justice. I'm very excited that you will tell us more because up to now our interviewees were not so happy to discuss it.
I mean that their expertise was just not in that area. So our data shows that criminal justice performance has improved in recent years. At the same time, the scores for different indicators that are part of criminal justice.
They are below the midpoint, so in my opinion they are modest or low. At the same time we see the improvement. Public perception point to the same direction. The share of people who feel the system operates independently increased.
From 78% in 2018 to 84% in 2025. I'm wondering from your perspective, do you agree that there was an improvement and what specific maybe changes either in law, in institutions?
In in how things are run, do you think explain what we are seeing or if you disagree again, why you disagree?

INT08   41:26
I think there's a divergent again. If you talk about non-political ordinary cases, business cases, for example, ordinary disputes, things are actually quite OK based on what I've heard.
That's there are all complaints, of course, but they're not very, very, very bad. But suddenly when you talk about political cases, cases between the government versus the people, that hierarchical, vertical relationship, then suddenly we are.
In now a state of exception within the criminal justice system.

Marta Basystiuk   42:02
Mm.

INT08   42:06
Just to give you an example, when it comes to less majestic cases, I think the indictment rate is around ninety-eight percent, ninety-nine percent. It was 100% before.
But I think it's safe to say more than 95% for sure. That is to say, all cases of lesson suggested that the police investigate and then refer to the prosecutor. You can say that they would file. They would file an indictment.
So I don't think that's. So that seems to me that there's some sort of policy there at the Attorney General office when it comes to Les Majeste cases. And this is a very political case, as I'm sure you know, back in 2018 to 2020, there were zero Les Majeste cases because.
The Prime Minister back then said the king said we shouldn't be using this law, so we shouldn't be using this law. And then suddenly less majestic cases dropped to 0. And then in 2020, because of the movement, the Prime Minister came out and say again, all the people have been criticizing the king. It's time to bring back the law. We're going to use all laws and articles.
And then suddenly we see a spike in a number of less magistic cases. So the enforcement of this law changes with the direction of the political wind. If it blows one way, it comes back, it blows another, it goes away.

Marta Basystiuk   43:29
Mhm.

INT08   43:31
But more than that, when it comes to the rights of people, suspects or defendants in the criminal justice system, very, very problematic. And I think I want to focus on the judiciary right now. I think that's where we see a lot of problems when it comes to judicial independence, for example, that's very problematic.
2019 Supreme Court regulation that requires judges to submit drafts order or draft judgments to be reviewed by the regional Chief Justice before those judgments or orders can be issued. So again, where's the independence there?
Many of the political cases to which that I've been to that our lawyers work on, it's very common for judges to take a 5 minute recess, 10 minute recess, 30 minute recess to walk out of the courtroom to consult the court executives about what to do in their case, about whether to grant bail, about whether to.
Postpone a case about whether to issue a subpoena for the defense, and then after the recess, I would come back to the room and say, having consulted a court executive, bail is not granted. The hearing can be postponed. So again, when it comes to the independence of judges presiding over their own.
Cases, whether they can make those decisions themselves, we have a lot of questions there or even judicial impartiality. Very common for the lawyer and the defendant to walk into a courtroom and to immediately receive prejudicial comments from judges about that.
Alleged conduct even before trials began. Things like you should, you know, speaking against the king is not something you should be doing, even though it hasn't been established. What has been said against the king, for example, our lawyers would be lectured many times. Like, you know, it's not enough that you're a smart lawyer.
You must be also a good people, a good person as well. So when it comes to the impartiality of judges, very problematic. And even in the issue of transparency in the criminal justice process, last year alone we've seen quite a number of secret trial orders.
Being issued to kick members of the public out of the courtroom, despite of the the right to a public trial under international law, but also under the Criminal Procedural Code, the Thai Criminal Procedural Code. And this usually happens in less majestic cases. They don't want the public to hear what's.
discuss during the hearings, how witnesses testify. And I've been in those hearings many times when I would be kicked out of the room. Uh But sometimes the lawyer would successfully negotiate with a judge to not to lift the
Trial order or to not use a secret trial order. And when that happens, sometimes they impose A gag order instead. So you can be in the courtroom, but whatever you see, whatever you hear, you cannot tell the people outside the courtroom about it.
So when it comes to transparency, very problematic. And one thing we've see, we've been seeing as well in political cases is the persistent refusal of judges to issue subpoenas for the defense counsel.
You can imagine how in many of these cases, the protesters, the activists, were accused of lying about the king, lying about the monarchy, that their speeches were not truthful. So naturally, the defense would want to prove the truthfulness.
Of their speeches. To do that, they need they usually speak about official information, budgetary allocation to the monarchy, whether the king was in fact in Germany a few years ago. Those factual issues that can be easily proven by office through official records.
But judges would not issue subpoenas in any of these cases. They would say, well, it's about the king, it's national security, it's parliamentary allocation of budget. Well, what does it have to do with this case? So again, it's really hard to access information in the courtroom.
To defend the defense, for example.
And the last issue I want to highlight is the issue of right to bail. Many people are put in detention pending trial or pending appeal. So again, that's a clear violation of the right to be presumption of innocent innocence, for example.

Marta Basystiuk   48:15
Thank you so much. You mentioned so many developments that you were just answering my questions before I even asked the questions and I'm now looking at the list and I feel like you mentioned everything that was important to us. And thank you because our scores are also low when it comes to impartiality.

INT08   48:35
Um.

Marta Basystiuk   48:35
Investigative effectiveness, timeliness, rehabilitation. So some of this correlates with what you mentioned. I would say, how do you think as my final general question, how do you think those constraints?
Affect public trust in criminal justice system.

INT08   48:57
I don't think when it comes to political cases, I don't think they have a lot of trust. I think right now there's a general acknowledgement that these are political cases, so they would already predict the outcome of the cases.
Even before the outcomes come out. And I think that's true of criminal cases in Criminal Court, as well as cases before the Constitutional Court. For example, last year when the party was resolved, I think it didn't come a surprise to anyone in Thailand.
I think people have been waiting for the party to be dissolved. I think when it comes to political cases, in that sense, there's a bit of stability and certainty. We know what we will get. We know the party will be dissolved. We know Ana Nampa, my colleague, will be convicted. There's no surprise there. So in that case.
I think that trust is very, very low in political cases.

Marta Basystiuk   49:55
Thank you so much. Ana Marie, do you have any other questions pertaining to criminal justice or any other in general?

Ana Maria Montoya   50:01
No, I just, yeah, want to thank you for all this information. It has been super interesting to to speak with you. I just so basically this is the first wave of interviews that we are conducted with experts and organizations, but we would like to actually get.

Marta Basystiuk   50:08
Yes.

Ana Maria Montoya   50:21
Get in contact with people on the ground, activists, victims, minorities, vulnerable populations. We all we already cover experts as you and and lawyers, but really we would love to meet people on the ground even if.
They don't speak Spanish. Our director of of of Asia Pacific is from Thailand and he's willing to conduct the interview in Thai. So by any chance do you know anyone that might be interested to speak with us?
Uh, can you make the referral? Um, yeah, that will be super helpful so we can represent their voices. Uh.

INT08   51:06
Have you spoken to anyone from the southern border provinces of Thailand?

Marta Basystiuk   51:11
I don't think so.

INT08   51:12
Yeah, I think I can make a few referrals and I'm sure they will be very happy to give information. But yeah, that's like the Wild West of Thailand, the they have their own rule of law issues, very different from what I described, some of them similar. But yeah, that's that's a whole another world right down there.

Ana Maria Montoya   51:23
Me too.
Oh, that will be great.

INT08   51:31
In the Deep South, Yeah, OK, yeah, I can definitely make some referral.

Ana Maria Montoya   51:33
Perfect. Thank you.
That's that's great. Thank you so much. Another important issue is that we will once we write and analyze all these interviews, we will send you the text and in in any case if you are quote, we will send you everything. So you will check if you.
If you want to be quote or not, or if you want to be anonymous, we will be sharing everything before before publication.

Marta Basystiuk   52:05
Yep, because.

INT08   52:05
OK. Thank you very much. I really appreciate that.

Ana Maria Montoya   52:07
Yes.

Marta Basystiuk   52:08
I'm sorry, I know that we almost say our goodbyes, but I do have two general questions to wrap up our conversation. You mentioned so many excellent points, yes.

INT08   52:14
Of course, I'll fire you away.

Ana Maria Montoya   52:19
I will have to leave, but but thank you so much. It's just my my daughter wake up at 6:00 and I need to take her to take care. But thank you so much. And yeah, thank you, Marta. Bye.

Marta Basystiuk   52:23
Yeah.
Absolutely. Yeah. Bye. Yeah. Bye. Akarachai, thank you so much. It was so excellent. I'm just very thankful that we had this conversation and that we met. I'm very impressed with what you do. Is there anything that we haven't covered but you think is important for us to know about?

INT08   52:29
OK. Yes, it's nice meeting you and Maria.

Marta Basystiuk   52:48
and you highlight it in the report.
It can be outside of the list that I sent to you, but just in general that you think is something is missing because with the survey data as a lawyer, so I'm a trained lawyer and for me this experience with the World Justice Project is kind of a new one and sometimes just having the survey data for me it's not enough.

INT08   52:53
Hmm.
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   53:12
To truly understand the underlying factors like why we are seeing this. So in that sense, do you think there is anything that we are missing that we need to know and then include, analyze, delve deeper?

INT08   53:15
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   53:28
Into that.

INT08   53:28
I I think the
Two issues. The first one is political prisoners. I think we haven't touched on that a lot. But when it comes to prison conditions, the rise of political prisoners or prisoners in general event, we see a lot of problems there.

Marta Basystiuk   53:36
Mhm.

INT08   53:48
There's an organization called Freedom Bridge. That's like our sister organization that works on to support political prisoners. And that's how I learned about many of these issues from them. Things like, you know, access to healthcare, that's going to be an issue. There's a there's a women's prison whereby.

Marta Basystiuk   53:52
Mhm.

INT08   54:07
There's a number of pills that one prison cell can get access to per day. So we would receive report from our client who also suffer from an illness, but she would say today I'm not going to take the medicine so that my friend can access that pill because if I take it, it means.
One less pill for people in the cell. So again, issues like access to healthcare or even hygiene. When you take a shower, that would count from 1 to 15. And if you don't finish by then, then, well, it's too late. You need to finish by 15 seconds or even things like nutrition or even visitation.

Marta Basystiuk   54:40
No.

INT08   54:44
For example, the visitation rights really, really depends on which prison you're talking about. There's no uniform standard across across the country, but there's a lot of restrictions there. I think there's you only people on the list of 10 people.
Can visit. So many times it's very difficult for prisoners to get visitation. But yeah, I think, I think that's the issue of political prisoners. The second issue is what I alluded to just now. I think the big thing for Thailand for the past few years and especially this year and going forward.

Marta Basystiuk   55:12
Yes.
Excellent.

INT08   55:22
That's going to be constitutional amendment. The the 2017 Constitution is is seen perceived by the majority of people to be the root causes of democratic issues, rule of law issues, the independence of Constitutional Court justices. Again, right now Constitutional Court.

Marta Basystiuk   55:23
Mhm.
Thank you.

INT08   55:42
Justice.
Need to be appointed or the appointment need to be approved by the unelected Senate, the Senate that is now controlled by one party, given how the appointment system or the selection process is designed. And I think that's why there's not a lot of trust in the Constitutional Court, given how the how people get to the constitutional.
Court, for example, and with things like, you know, the Election Commission, same procedure with the Constitutional Court justices come from the Senate and now the Election Commission is investigating the Senators for rigging the Senate selection process.
But the senators get to pick who will be in the Election Commission. That is to say, they pick their own investigators. So again, with that, with that constitutional design, obviously people don't have a lot of trust. The point I'm trying to make here is that the focus now this year for the next few years is constitutional amendment.

Marta Basystiuk   56:31
8.

INT08   56:39
I think if you don't amend the Constitution, people will will continue to have a lot of distrust towards a political system.

Marta Basystiuk   56:47
Great. Thank you so very much. OK, final, very brief question. My favorite one. If you can in one sentence assess the situation of the human rights and the rule of law, if you want in one sentence, what would it be?

INT08   57:05
Oh.

Marta Basystiuk   57:06
Awesome now.

INT08   57:08
As of now.
The human rights situation.
Looks good, but it's a lot worse than it looks.

Marta Basystiuk   57:26
But in reality, it's worse.

INT08   57:28
Yeah, I think, and I think I say that, you know, because after the election, Thailand is about to have an election. And I think in the eyes of many people, including the international community, there's a return to the civilian-led government. It seems like things are slowly returning to normal. But when you actually look at the statistics of political prosecution.

Marta Basystiuk   57:29
Can.
Mhm.

INT08   57:50
Many times we wonder what the difference is between this administration and the previous administration. But again, you need to look really deep and closely to see that. Otherwise it seems like Thailand is back on track. That's why I say it. It's a lot worse than it looks.

Marta Basystiuk   58:05
It's.
I love it. Can I attribute your name to this quote or shall I leave it anonymous? I feel like after our conversation, I just feel like we need to keep it confidential. But please let me know because I definitely don't want to put you.

INT08   58:13
I think you can.
I think this, yeah, this quote is fine. I think you can send it to me again, but this quote is fine and I'm quite, I'm quite OK with it, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   58:24
OK. OK, perfect. And as Anna Marie said, she will be sending you the entire thing so you can double check everything. That is it. Thank you so very much. It was a real pleasure and I've learned so much. Thank you.

INT08   58:39
Now the picture is mine as well, Ma. It's so nice seeing you.

Marta Basystiuk   58:40
And I hope we will stay. Yeah. Thank you so much and have a great rest of the day.

INT08   58:46
OK, you too have a good evening.

Ana Maria Montoya stopped transcription
