INT01

Marta Basystiuk   3:13
It's it's just the digital world world. It's always, it's always like this non-reliable. Thank you so much again. So I will return to my general question. I'm curious what is your view on the general state of human rights in Deep South?
And if there are any key developments that are important for us to know that are affecting the rights, please also highlight them. Thank you.

INT01   3:35
Mhm.
The key important point that happened in the Deep South Thailand, we have special law, not only the criminal law or civil law, and we have special law using for the only conflict area. One is martial law, the 2nd is emergency.
And the third is Internal Security Act, and the martial law can detain people without arrested violence in seven days.
And then they continue to using, uh, the emergency degree that they can detain, uh, people without Alicia Boland.
28 day and can add more two days and then it mean that they can detain people without arrested violent one month and during the detention they're not detained in the prison, they detain special detentions based in.
Based in military camp and police camp and we found since 2004 until now they have like a torture case inside this detention and some of them were.
Die during interrogation and also someone die during a transportation. That is the the problem of the special law and the special law can around the military and police.
Seeing the law by killing or we call extrajudicial killing or extra what you call arbitrary killing because of they say that this is the insurgency group or movement or combatant from the.
The the specific group or non-state armed group that we call in the South because of the conflict happened between the movement group who want to separate from Thailand. We call BRN or Nalisan level Lucy.
Nationality and the Thai loyal military and then during the fighting among the non state armed group and Thai military the affected affect to the the victims from the conflict.
Are mostly the civilian and the currently situation right now we found that the civilian affected from the conflict then the military from the both side and they also abused the IHL such as.
As they attack school, they attack the building of the civilians, such as the petrol station and the transportation and on the roadside.

Marta Basystiuk   6:50
I'm very sorry to hear that, but thank you for sharing this information with us. And what I'm hearing is a couple of things that also we measured with our data. And if you don't mind, I'd like to start with the right to information and privacy our data shows.
Some small modest, I would say, improvements when it comes to the protection of right to life and then personal security and also freedom from interference with privacy. At the same time, the the scores are, I would say, below the midpoint.

INT01   7:18
Yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   7:24
And I'm wondering, does that align with what you see on the ground in Deep South? And if not, what is the data missing?

INT01   7:34
Sorry, can you repeat your questions again?

Marta Basystiuk   7:38
Yeah. So I would like to know whether you agree practically that there are some gains with respect to the protection of the right to life and the right to security. And at the same time, I will ask you separately about interference.

INT01   7:46
Mm.

Marta Basystiuk   7:54
With privacy. So let's focus only on the right to life and then the personal security. Have you noticed any positive developments? Would you agree with our survey data that there were gains? If not, could you please explain why not? What are the reasons? What are the underlying factors?

INT01   8:15
I from my side, even though the situations from the like the death or injuries of the civilians is reduced, unfortunately the space for a civic space is not better and privacy is more abused by.
By the the security officers such as the NGO and activists and people can sharing their informations or their might on the Facebook.
Facebook or on the social media we we have the we call the operation from the military side information operations that attack NGO and activists who talking about the human rights and peace.
Who presenting the situation in the Deep South attacked the military specifically and in three years we have 22 activists and human rights defenders shot by the military.
Department and the police due to posting or have SMB in the public space and not only charging or celeb using celeb attack them but they have something we call head speech.
On the Facebook page and not only it's me also I can share my some attack directly to me. We we I'm a human right defender. We I was charged two times in 10 years from the.

Marta Basystiuk   9:50
Mhm.

INT01   10:07
About the information and computer crime back and the first case they withdraw my chart because of the dealing from our side and from the military side and the 2nd the the chart are still on the.
Put on coming to the trial process and the court have a a quick sentence because of no proof, no anything prove that I post a bad thing direct to attack to the military.
And the case on the trial process is 9.
Night.
More than more than more than 10 activists still are still on the trial process due to the select case, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   11:01
Thank you for sharing this and thank you for being so courageous to stand for for protecting basically the freedom of expression and freedom of opinion. You mentioned that civic space in general is declining, if I'm hearing that's correctly.
And when we separately look at the freedom of expression, especially in social or digital world, it's also being under surveillance and monitoring, so people do not feel safe to express their opinions.

INT01   11:17
Yes.

Marta Basystiuk   11:32
Do you think that your personal example of a founder of a well-known organization who is being charged with offenses, alleged offenses are creating?
Chilling effect for the rest of the community so that it basically bans, not bans, but they are not as willing to participate in a public life because of the examples that is happening to public leaders like you.

INT01   12:03
Yes, it's it's a shelling not only me but the for the public and others activists. They they change their behaviour. They they cannot presenting about the our brave or presenting the situation because they don't know.
What happened after that? And uh, they moved to like uh.
To be like influencers such as the sporty man or funny man like the citizen in the Deep South is still bad or Ross, but the activist cannot do anything due to the monitoring from the civilian group or civilian from the.
Military side and when we compare the situation in the Deep South and in Thailand as a whole, we feel like this area controlled by the militized, militarization or authoritarianism. That's why.

Marta Basystiuk   13:04
Mhm.

INT01   13:07
The government department here under the they can control budget, they can control policy and they can control the practitioners or organizer from the government side, the other government department.
Cannot speak anything about the situation in Deep South, only received the order from the military and due to the special law, the process of justice cannot using in the Deep South.
Normal or ordinary process from other part of Thailand had not used using in the Deep South in term of the justice process.

Marta Basystiuk   13:57
Thank you for clarifying that. We had a couple of interviews where experts would say that they understand why our data is showing the improvement when it comes to general assembly, freedom of general assembly and organizing, because they are basically saying that.
People are OK with discussing anything but particular issues, and those issues are politically oriented, so to speak. So you can't discuss anything that has to do with the monarchy, with the military, with anyone who are in power. Do you think that also is the case in the deep sea?
South or in Deep South, the situation is a bit worse because basically all of the issues, let's put it this way, are under monitoring by different actors. What is your?

INT01   14:44
Yes, yes. Like for example in the in the Bangkok they focus on the 112 or monarchy SMB against monarchy or SMB against the government side who support by the monarchy and some some people said that.

Marta Basystiuk   14:48
Vision.

INT01   15:04
better, but it's not better because we don't have any assembly after after unknown was detained many time and many activists were was detained. But in this Deep South we have in 2000 in 2022 we have the big.
But organized by the human rights defenders and activists in the Deep South who are minority group. Malayu Muslim group organized the the assembly to presenting the.
Ethnic identity and ethnic of Malayu and after that the nine activists were were shot and still on the trial process and who joining this activity we counting that we we.
counting that 50,000 Malayu Muslim, not only men but women also, joining this assembly were surveillance by the military after that.
By searching at their house because they have picture. They take a picture all people who joining the the SMB and they follow them to the to their house, searching their house, follow their transport or travel after they back.
From the border, from the Malaysia side, then they were shot by the military even though they passed the immigration already, but they were shot by the military again to say that you are the list or the back list from the military list.
And when when they detained or when they when they arrest the people by the special law, the one question from the interrogation, they asked the people, did you join the assembly, the Malayu assembly or not?
Did you listen the pageing page, the page from the Marayu people who talking about the history or not? It related with the activist, it related with the assembly and it related with the Marayu identity.

Marta Basystiuk   17:33
And can I please ask you what was the main?
I want to say topic of discussion, not the topic, but what was at stake at this assembly, whether you people were there to defend their rights in general or some specific rights that military and other actors didn't like the attention.
I'm trying to figure out what was. Do you think it was about the topic that was at stake in particular some type of rights or it was because of their of different socio economic factors like their ethnicity, their religion, their?
Um uh.
Any other factor that can come to mind that are basically can be seen as an evidence of some sort of discrimination?

INT01   18:28
This is a discrimination because of Thailand as a whole. The member of Thailand as a whole are Buddhist and Thai nations, but in the Deep South 80% of preparation here.
My you and the religious is Muslim. It related with the history in the past that they are independent in the past up. They have the the independent until 1909.
After the British signed the treaty with the the Thai government and then they have like the fighting group establishing by the king in the past from the Pattani side. That's why the the center of the country.
the country or the government of the country think that the Malayu Muslim here are member of the movement group. This is a stigmatization and discrimination against the Malayu Muslim and uh when the youth or boy.
Assembly together. They think that this is the the the people want to separate from the country. They not think that the this group presenting about identity or plow themselves that they are Malayan Muslim.

Marta Basystiuk   19:56
So it doesn't matter what type of topic you're discussing, it's just the fact that Muslim people are gathering together. It's seen as some type of threat, national security threat or whatever they may think. That's very important.

INT01   20:09
The the topic that they're presenting on the stage, they're presenting about the love of Islam, like believe in Islam, believe in the Malayu identity, believe in the building relationship among the Malayu Muslim in the Deep South.

Marta Basystiuk   20:20
Mm-hmm.
Mhm.

INT01   20:28
And encourage youth to helping or creating the the good, the good wife of society that something like youth or boy must take care the people in the society help.
Being the people working hard to make their have a good livelihood. This is the the the the word on the state. But this song some song on the state that they present they have some word about independent.

Marta Basystiuk   20:54
Yeah.
Mhm.

INT01   21:05
In Malayu language and this this point make the military using to charge them.

Marta Basystiuk   21:15
So that's thank you so much for sharing the example because that's exactly what we are interested in understanding. Our data is showing when it comes to freedom of belief that it's comparatively very well protected in Thailand and it has improved over the last five years.

INT01   21:29
Yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   21:32
And when specifically we'll look at the data to what general public is thinking, we are seeing that 89%, which is a very large majority of general population, they believes that religious minorities can observe their holy days.

INT01   21:48
Yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   21:48
And other Do you agree with this assessment, or do you take it with a caveat that it applies in general to Thai people but not to the minorities?

INT01   22:00
Because of the constitution in Thailand, they using the word like Buddhist is the one is the one religions in Thailand or specific have a word to say that the Buddhist religion is very important for the Thai nation and people.
Uh, they they live with the nationalism vibes since a UTR era by more than 600 or 800 years ago. They're building the feeling of one.
Nation one religions and they deny other people who different from them, such as indigenous people or tribals or minority group.
It difference from Muslim in Bangkok or in other part of Thailand. Muslim in Bangkok they don't have identity specifics such as the different language, different tradition and then they accept the Thai nation.
But in the South they have a strong identity of Malayu. They speak with different language like Malayu language or like Malaysia or Indonesia area. That's why it is very, very like a difference.

Marta Basystiuk   23:32
Mhm.

INT01   23:33
Type of people here and then they think that this is the second class of the country they can control in the past. They can control them by separate them by order them and using the violence.
Since 1909 we we have many case that when they have problem inside the Deep South in the past they're using torture and enforced to disappearance people and killing and bombing people. That's why the people here.
Some people here against the government from the Bangkok.

Marta Basystiuk   24:11
I will now pass the the floor, so to speak, to my colleague Santiago. At the same time, I just wanted to double check with you because hearing your story, I I just want to be clear. Are you sure you want to be acknowledged in the report? Is it? I just want to make sure that we will not.
Put you on more.
Surveillance or it's an honor that you're participating in this interview, but I also want to make sure that you are safe. So I now put a note that you are OK with the acknowledgement, but if at any point, if you decide otherwise, please let us know by e-mail or at the end of this discussion.

INT01   24:47
Okay, okay.

Marta Basystiuk   24:50
And another note, I will be leaving soon because I have, I need to catch my flight. But so if I disconnect, I'm very sorry. I really wanted to meet with you and to start this conversation. So thank you so much and I will pass the floor to Santiago and maybe he can continue asking you about the access to information because it's also something.

INT01   24:56
Oh.

Marta Basystiuk   25:09
That is connected to freedom of assembly or organizing and maybe also a question or two about NGOs. I'm interested to know how your particular foundation is operating. Some of the experts are telling us that there are restrictions, financial constraints, budgetary.
Constraints, but also some draft laws that make that can make potentially the operations of civil society organizations more problematic. So I'm I will be also curious to know, but sorry for intervening, just giving some guidance. OK, I'll stop here. Thank you again so much.

INT01   25:46
OK.

Santiago Pardo   25:49
OK. Thank you, Marta. As Marta said, now we are wondering to to know about some of your opinions about participation and access to information. I want to start asking about.
The access to complaint mechanisms that you have in your country, you have been telling to us some concerns that you have in time when you try to to to to.
Execute your, your, your, exercise your your civil rights.
And our data suggests that the access to this, the to complaint mechanism has has declined during the last five years. What is your opinion about it and and if you can tell us?

INT01   26:42
About the about the campaign mechanism in Thailand, we cannot in in the Deep South, we cannot believe about the National Security Council, National Human Rights Council.

Santiago Pardo   26:47
Exactly.

INT01   27:00
Because of last three years, one military changed their position to apply to be officer in the National Human Rights Council. They are one of the officer from this National Human Rights Council in the Deep South.
And we cannot trust the team who control other officer in the department in the Deep South. And we found that after the the claim or the the the people, the victim came to this sector.
They mostly not have any action. They only said that this is the right of the military, this is the discipline of the military or this is the they they do, they do something right already.
Even though we found that such as the DNA collection, we have many people who detain during the special law must correct DNA profiling and they said that.
This is the the the right of the military, even though they don't have the consent or the consent enforced by the gun during the interrogation or ordinary people travel on the road to from the district to other district.
And the police get the DA during the the traveling and the the National Human Rights Council said that is a right of the military and police to do that because of they have consent.
But the consent may form the gun because they hold the gun during enforce to get in it and and and I didn't agree with that. And then some organizations send the claim to the.
National Human Rights Council, but for my organization, it's not safe because it lesser with the torture wounded by the military inside the military camp or the extrajudicial killing case that killed by the military.
And we need to protect the survival families, yeah, and be helping them other other processes as the recovering the mental health problem and helping them by support the livelihood.

Santiago Pardo   29:45
This is very interesting. Oh, OK.

INT01   29:46
Oh, oh, other channel. We have the parliament and then some case in the South sending to the parliament, but like a committee, a committee on the.
Law and human right and then they will send the case to the parliament and investigation in the committee. But it's not like it's not happen anything better.
Only like the pyramid know this is know this issue but not change into the the the conflict area due to the militarization and authorization.

Santiago Pardo   30:34
OK. I have one question about it and in this conflict, OK, in this conflict area that you that you mentioned, are there other other independent bodies that you?
Can trust more for for for putting that words or or do you think that this distrust in these over these institutions are are extend to to all the institutions?
Uh.
Even the indeendent ones from the from from tile.

INT01   31:13
I think the problem happened or this situation happened only in the Deep South, but other parts.

Santiago Pardo   31:19
OK.

INT01   31:22
It depends on the law and the problem in the the in Thailand focus on on women to or the the people group who adjust the government who support by the the some elite group.

Santiago Pardo   31:44
This is very interesting. Also, I only want to highlight that according to our data, one of the biggest declines that we can see is the civic participation actually. And you during this interview you you you are giving to us a lot of elements to understand better this.

INT01   31:57
Mm-hmm.

Santiago Pardo   32:04
Decline about this decline. Do you want to add something else? Uh, about the status of the civic participation?

INT01   32:14
Uh, participation in what? What kind of participation?

Santiago Pardo   32:19
For instance, um.
If you want to add some something about the freedom of opinion or or or the right to petition and civic engagement or maybe a we you already said to us that the Freedom of Assembly and Association is is not is not guaranteed in the in the Deep South.

INT01   32:28
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.

Santiago Pardo   32:43
Do you want to add something that about something that's about the the issues that that you have in the in the in the Deep South about civic participation?

INT01   32:54
This will be participation if we we found that if we talking about environment, we talking about economy is all is is OK to have assembly or can talk to to the people.
But when we talking about the conflict, the human rights and peace process is not OK for the the military side because of the military want to using the the weapon or using the violence to solve the conflict problem.
This this is the mindset of the military. That's why they control only the people, human rights or activists who against the idea of military in the Deep South.

Santiago Pardo   33:44
Hmm.
This is, this is very interesting. Let me pass to another topic that we are trying to cover here in the report that is about a fair and impartial justice. So basically.
In the way that we consider the the criminal justice and the and the civil justice here is a way to uphold and defend the human rights and according all the things that you have mentioned to us, I am curious about your opinion.
About.
The impartiality in the criminal justice system system in the Deep South. What can you tell us to us about this?

INT01   34:26
Yeah.
Yeah, in the conflict due to the conflict and the victim inside the victim in the government mind is the Buddhist group and the authority from the government side. This is the victim in the government mind.
And when we have victim from the Malayu Muslim side, they think that this is a member of the non-state armed group. When we think about the compensation to the victims who die from the conflict, they only support the victim who.
Are authority or Buddhist only and they deny to compensate to the Malayu Muslim side even though they are government officer or not. This is the compensation and due to the justice process the criminal.
Process when the Malayu Muslim are victim, they're not finding the perpetrator.
Because they think that who die from shooting are related with a member of the non-state armed group, but in the same families who are who was arrested.

Santiago Pardo   35:41
Hmm.

INT01   35:56
The process that bring them to the court is quickly, very quickly and the sentence like a life sentence or execution. This is the problem that we see that this is the impartial.
Justice process by the military police and the prosecution.
Because of the the evidence, not a building or exhibit or finding by the police or investigator, but finding from the military investigation department.
And the military, uh.
Control the police and prosecutor.
And court also or judge also they can control them. They have a special department about the investigation in case of national security case.
In term of the criminal justice investigation process, they allow the relatives or lawyer during the the investigation by the police, but the police will investigate the suspect persons inside the police.
Camp or military camp. They talking about the the document about this, but they not allow lawyer or relatives joining the investigation process.
In the court they say that they leave the document to them already, but the suspect person don't want any person to stay with them during the investigation process. It's it's not right. People need lawyer, but they're not they didn't allow.
The lawyer joining them, joining the process and even though the suspect person request lawyer or relative joining the investigation process, but it depends on the director of the.
National what I I Internal Security Organization or ISOC ISOC. You can search ISOC from Thailand. This is the military.
Uh.
military leader. That's why the justice process in the Deep South in case of national security under the military, not under the chart.

Santiago Pardo   38:49
OK.
First, thank you very much for for sharing this. I am curious about.
Something that you said and and and is about these dynamics in in the card or or in the in the justice system.
And I want to ask you about the independence that the judges have at the time to decide. Can you describe for me the situation in in in in terms of judicial independence of the judges?

INT01   39:23
Independent.

Santiago Pardo   39:26
In in in this kind of cases, do you think that there is some improper influence or or something?

INT01   39:34
Uh.
Uh, I I think it has many level uh.
Like a police and prosecutor is not independent. They're under the military during the interrogation process. They're using the evidence from the interrogation process in the military camp, but the judge, I think.
Uh 50-50% but we have case of the judge suicide in the court due to the leader of the judge order him to change the the sentence.

Santiago Pardo   40:02
Hmm.

INT01   40:18
In case of national security case.
He not died during the suicide in the court. The judge cannot didn't die, but after that the the Justice Department investigate the him and then he was suicide at his house after that.

Santiago Pardo   40:41
Mm.
OK. OK. Thank you for for these answers. I only want to ask a final questions about a criminal justice system and it's about the due process. I mean, during this interview is very clear that Thailand is struggling out.
A lot. I mean the deep sod is is trying a lot in in the process.
In.
Are you more that?
Where are the main challenges? My question is about.
The solutions, I mean what what kind, what kind of of public policy or or or or or what kind of requests have you been doing to improve the the?

INT01   41:25
Play solution.

Santiago Pardo   41:38
The due process because it's clear that you have a struggle a lot about the due process of the of the of the.
Of the low here.

INT01   41:49
Yeah, first thing I think we need to withdraw or end using the special law, not only emergency decree, but also martial law because of martial law is a task is is.
Using more than 100 years ago and announced in the deep so more than 20 to 22 years ago. And this is the first step that make the people feel untrust the justice process.
And the special law make the people don't believe in the justice process in the Deep South. Then people who face of the threatened by the military leave from the country are free and then it's a loop of extrajudicial killing after that.
I think in withdrawn the special law, every special law and move to using the normal law or criminal law, make them the normalization to the people.
By in the special law first thing and the second thing, we need to move to the peace process and peace process does talking about the the persecution process or ethnesty or thinking about how to.
form the law in in the Deep South or in Thailand too. That make the people don't believe the law and order in the in Thailand.

Santiago Pardo   43:28
OK. This is very interesting. Thank you. Thank you for for all your answers actually. Now I want to change the this topic a little bit and I want to to to talk about labour and property rights in the Deep South because.

INT01   43:45
Yeah.

Santiago Pardo   43:46
Um.
1st I I want to to to know your opinion about a.
The current status of the of the labor rights in this region, and by your point, if these rights have improved or declined during the last years.

INT01   44:10
Um, I don't have know much about label, right? But in the Deep South, only in the Deep South.
We don't have the the system about the right of the rebel because people don't have a skill and know like knowledge and don't have the factory or the large investment in the Deep South due to the conflict. That's why people move to other part of the Deep South such as.
Malaysia country or Phuket or Bangkok to work and then it's related with the labor right in in in the normal of the Thailand. But it think labor right like the law is good but the practice is bad.
Due to the what you call it, Pakistan comb, I don't know what in in the bad, the bad system take care of the labor in Thailand and the bad practice from the owner of the company.
for my site.
The thing about like like the the big company in Thailand, they don't respect the people on the ground. They work hard, but the the weight is very low.

Santiago Pardo   45:41
OK and.
Just one question more about this.
How are the the conditions of the of of the people in in the Deep South in terms of labour, labour?
Protections. Um.
You know what I mean?

INT01   46:08
Yes, yes, but but I think it it's not good because of the people don't come into the system the the the owner company or SME of the factory is.

Santiago Pardo   46:19
Hmm.

INT01   46:25
Come to the system, trying the system, but the SME or the owner like a small business not using the system because of the small business and we don't have like.
In oversight from the government side.
Not inspect, not follow up.

Santiago Pardo   46:53
OK, OK. And just just one more point in there. To what extent can workers organize farm onions and bargain collectively without fear of any retaliation or?
Eh, in the Deep South.

INT01   47:13
Sorry, I can't understand well.

Santiago Pardo   47:16
I mean.
Huh.
To to to what extent people can organize and form labor unions to.

INT01   47:28
All.

Santiago Pardo   47:28
To express their in conformities and and these these these things that you.

INT01   47:34
I I didn't see it.
I didn't see it.
Not union in the deep sound about this or like a they have a sector of education like a institution of the education or school because we have like a Islamic private school.
And the teacher here, they don't get the good money. They don't. They cannot establish the Union and they cannot deal with the owner of the school. They have low salary.
It I think because of.
This is the socetric society that people don't have much space for their life, for exercise their life.

Santiago Pardo   48:30
M.

INT01   48:30
This is a is a norm of Muslim in my in my mind. Muslim like under the leader. That's why they cannot fighting more.

Santiago Pardo   48:43
OK, this is this is very interesting. I think that we are done with with all the questions that we have. I have two more questions for you and the first one is that if do you do you want to add something about the current status of the fundamental?
Rides in the Deep South. Do you think that there is something else to add?

INT01   49:08
I think discrimination on the right of the minority is very important point that need to change from the talent as a whole, not not the government side, but if the government side start.
To destroy the discrimination concept in Thailand, it will make a good mindset to the conflict in the Deep South. Yes, not only the government officer but also Thailand as a whole due to the information operations make the head speed.
Direct to the Malayu Muslim in the Deep South and they have paid speech attack Muslim Malayu and they say that the Malayu Muslim are member of the non state armed group or movement. This this this point need to change.
If they don't change, then they use the the the violence way to solve the conflict in the Deep South. This is the cycle of violence in the Deep South now.
Let's back the minority, right?

   50:24
OK, OK.

Santiago Pardo   50:27
And one final question for you, and this is the Martha's favorite one.

INT01   50:35
Mhm.

Santiago Pardo   50:38
Basically, if you can in one sentence assess the situation of the human rights in the Deep South.
What will it be?

INT01   50:52
One word for the human rights.

Santiago Pardo   50:55
Mhm.

INT01   50:58
And to what?

Santiago Pardo   51:01
OK, OK.

INT01   51:02
Must. Uh, human rights deserve much better.
People in Thailand deny human rights concept.
They they don't believe human rights. They don't know human rights. That's why this is the problem in Thailand and specific in the Deep South, people not respect each other, but different from them.
And human life much better.
