INTERVIEW CODE 9

Marta Basystiuk   0:03
And if you can give us some examples of the developments, both negative and positive, that you feel are particularly important for this topic, we would be very grateful.

INT11   0:13
OK, for me and according to the report, I think the fundamental rights here is now I can say is get better than the past decade. For me, I think because we compare with the time we were under the coup, military coup and then passing to military.
Military government and then right now we have a civilian government. So we see the progress of supporting fundamental rights. We can see that both from the inside the parliament or inside the state factors, for example, we pass a lot of bills that support.
Fundamental right, the same-sex marriage, the rights about the labour, support the labour, for example, and some issues about selling the products that I don't know how to call that, but it disrupt the monopoly system in Thailand.
For example, you can sell the liquor, the alcohol beverage, even you are a small producer or distributor. So I think it shows that we make a progress on that or even the things that happen outside the state system for example.
We can go to the street, arrange the protest or we can express ourselves in social media or with the media. The media can tackle with a complex issue that creation the state action more than the past decades. I think we won because the politics change during.
This time. And the other thing is because the civil society feel that we don't want to go back to that dark era again. So we need to do something. See this end that grow up at during that time like me. Yeah, we want to do something as well. So yeah, we we we just rise up and do something.
But for me, something hasn't changed. For example, if you're dealing with the sensitive issue in Thailand or dealing with the people with much power, not only politicians, but the big company does have a lot of influence on the politicians as well.
I think it's it's still it's still the issue that you can get the suppression from this state. For example, you cannot talk about the monarchy everywhere in Thailand right now. That's a sensitive issue or you cannot.
Criticize the military or the kind of very influential politicians because you will get so by that issue. A lot of media get get so and they need to go to the court recently during before the election and we cannot.
Talk about the kind of the monopoly of some big corporate in Thailand because if we are a small group of people, we don't have the resource to fight with them or go to the judiciary process, just this process after that because we have, we are fighting with the people with unlimited resource.
So I think overall we get better in several ways, but for some ways, just like some sensitive issue of freedom expression, I think it's still limited in Thailand.

Marta Basystiuk   3:40
That's excellent. Thank you so much for this very helpful context and for drawing our our attention to both positive and slightly negative developments. That's very useful. I'd like to pick up on a couple of issues that you already mentioned, namely with respect to civic participation. So if you don't mind, I will use.

INT11   3:57
Oh.

Marta Basystiuk   3:59
I will be referencing some of our data and I will ask what you think about it. Our data shows specifically that when it comes to civic participation and access to information you already referred to, they have declined over the last five years.

INT11   4:04
OK.
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   4:16
At the same time, many people say that government information is now easier to understand and easier to find. I'm curious to know from your perspective, how would you describe the current state of public participation? And then later on we can go and discuss government transparency as well.

INT11   4:16
Mhm.
I think of some some law that actually exist for two decades. Yeah, 20 years ago is about other country may call it Freedom of Information Act, but in our country the name is official.
Information Act that's leads to the problem. I mean it both endorse the rights of the people to request the information from the officials. But the problem is, for example, like my organization, we use this.
Uh, to endorse our power for several data sets. But the problem is the one who decided that the information will be disclosed in authority is the official. So we need to pass a long process. If they say no, we cannot.
Give you this information and you pass. Sometimes we need to spend a year to kind of appeal it to several other government agencies. For example, if we request something from the parliament, they deny that we need to appeal to the office of the cabinet.
And.
Then they may reject and we need to appeal to the court again. So I think that's a Chanel. That's why they say it's improved because people know this Chanel and use it a lot to get the information they want. But The thing is the power is still kept with the official authority.
By the way, so so many have they spend a lot of effort, but they feel like they're powerless at the same time. So I think that's that's one point. And the other point, I think a lot of people feel like we have a lot of questionable situation in Thailand, for example, doing.
The past earthquake in the last year, yeah, government building collapse and we just want to know who who need to responsible for that. We want to know who who are the contractors and how they're responsible in each.
Part but you cannot find this kind of information in government website. You need to pass the process of requesting and appealing and other other many corruption issues in Thailand during when we when we under the civilian government because.
Because of the some parliamentarian in opposition party raised that in the parliament. So people want to know about that and try to find more information. So I think this is the ancient lead to we we want to engage more.
In the state issue, in the politic issue, but the obstacle of using our rights to access the information to kind of tackle without a doubt still have a problem like I mentioned. So right now that's that's one problem.

Marta Basystiuk   7:22
Mhm.

INT11   7:39
And sometimes you can get the information, but I don't think understandable for just a normal citizen. For example you you may get that you going to the government website and you found that that the funds of paper.
And mostly is in a poor format. For example, if you want to know about the national budget, the things that happen in our country is you go to the Budget Bureau office website, you will find 30.
Books of scanned PDF on that website and if you just only have one question who responsible for that situation, you need to look into almost 90,000 pages to find about that projects.

Marta Basystiuk   8:16
Mm.

INT11   8:29
So I think it's accessible, but not understandable and not usable for the civil, even they want to participate more in monitoring or questioning the state itself.

Marta Basystiuk   8:29
Mhm.
That's perfect. Thank you for clarifying because as I mentioned, our data showed that more people believe that it's more understandable. But what I'm hearing is that it really depends what type of information you're looking for and when it comes to budgets, it's very complicated.

INT11   8:54
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   8:57
That's excellent. Since you mentioned that now you're working on a very exciting initiative that is connected to digital tools, I am wondering have any of the digital tools or any other initiatives, maybe open data initiatives?
They actually made it easier for for people to engage with the decisions. You mentioned that when it comes to budgets, it's a bit complicated. But what about the elections? What about the local policies? Can you give us some examples when those things are actually working and are effective and when they are falling short?

INT11   9:31
OK. I I can come up with the the one I think works effectively in the past decades. I don't know if you know that Thai people can first you can propose the bill directly to the parliament. Yeah. And the parliament need to provide a kind of.
Electronic platform on that because right now we have the the build that support. We can do it by E signature. You don't have to go out and kind of get the real signature of the people. And along with that we have the application that we call Tidy. It's a digital ID that Tai people can use to claim.
Claim a lot of price. So I come up with the type. Sorry, I come up with the tidy first. I think this one is a tool that works for Thai government. For example, you cannot use tidy only to propose the bill to the parliament, but to claim a lot of price in Thailand.
For example, right now in the past year, I think we have a kind of a tax incentive that people can donate or buy something that in the category or in the criteria that the government are defined. You can use your tidy to link your donation directly.
With your tax information, you don't have to kind of make a complicated documentation like before. Even you you there's a there's a policy to give the money to support our daily life. For example, you get 2000 baht each month.
If you buy something, you pay half, the government pay another half so we can use Tai ID to register with our bank account and then get this right immediately directly with no documentation as so. So for me the digital tidy.
It works for a lot of citizens and going to that com ticket issue like that you know directly on the parliament website you can kind of initiate your campaign itself and you can.
and ask people to go to e-sign on that website as well. And it link with your information in in the state database, so you don't have to verify yourself again by any paper, so it link.
That's so I think that's work and also actually in Thai constitution they said that every bill that will pass to if it is if it's not proposed by the citizen itself, for example if proposed by the cabinet or parliamentarian before it pass.
To the deliberation in the parliament, they need to kind of do the public hearing 1st and the parliament provide this tool to kind of gather information from the people. You can kind of do that yourself directly in the kind of.
But the problem is they have a good intention, they have a channel, but the problem is is I don't think it's citizen centric because they post only a long information of the bill in the website and they use a kind of a form that don't.

Marta Basystiuk   12:57
Yes.

INT11   13:02
to to match with that. For example, they may ask one question, do you agree with this bill? Why and why not? And then just a big box to let you fill a free text, but no guiding like they have done try to help explain people what exactly is the key.
The goal of the bill, why we need that on that I think too less information to help just to do that. So I think that's some of example that I think work.

Marta Basystiuk   13:31
That makes.

INT11   13:37
Yeah, for Thai people.

Marta Basystiuk   13:39
Absolutely. And I appreciate that you actually provided the avenues or I would say the most common channels through that people use in Thailand to participate. I was wondering.

INT11   13:53
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   13:57
What or when exactly citizens or civil society groups, they try to scrutinize the decisions. How easy is it for them to actually obtain information? You mentioned that it's not that easy, but when it comes for them to.
Making sure that the decision was passed, what obstacles come up most often?

INT11   14:23
Uh, you mean in the public issue, right? When the authority or the parliamentarian, uh, may.

Marta Basystiuk   14:30
In general, in general, I appreciate that you've spoken a lot about the consultation, public consultation process that I understand is in place and is not is not ideal. I find it's very difficult to find any of the instruments that are.

INT11   14:38
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   14:50
Well functioning, there is always room for improvement, but maybe there is any other avenues that you feel like the citizens can feel empowered to scrutinize government's decisions and through that we can also see another dimension of the your civic participation.
It can be any type of local forums. You mentioned the online platforms, but anything else that you think is really influencing or showing how public can can make sure that the government, any states, state agencies are actually.

INT11   15:11
Yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   15:26
Oerating to the best of their abilities.

INT11   15:30
Uh uh.
I think it's uh it's not good here because you mostly you ask to participate before they decide something. But actually for me so many times it's just a visual that mean even you join the public hearing.
Or the public forum, even in physical way. Yeah, the a lot of government agencies, a lot of the state agencies, they do that because it requires is a is their mandate on the constitution, on the regulation, but it happens mostly before they make the decision.

Marta Basystiuk   16:07
Mhm.

INT11   16:13
And I think the the friction is we don't know if our opinion or our feedback influence any of that decision because it's just a process that happened before and then we can do nothing and.

Marta Basystiuk   16:28
Mhm.

INT11   16:29
After they make the decision, yeah, we during they make the decision, we don't have the kind of involvement on that. For example, yeah, right now we have the issue about the Social Security fund in our country. Right now they open for our feedback again to next week, but after that.

Marta Basystiuk   16:36
Mhm.

INT11   16:49
It's a close circle that the board of the Social Security fund, they say they will use this feedback to discuss in close circle together and then they will announce what the result. So I think we don't have the kind of involvement during the period and after.

Marta Basystiuk   17:08
Mhm.

INT11   17:09
So that if we have a problem, if you think it's not fair for us, I think the only way is we just I think maybe two ways. One way is not official. We can complain with the media, we can complain on our social media and hope that there will be a kind of a public.
This course again that put the pressure on them so but for me it's not as kind of systemic system it does so unofficial and the other way is that we can do is we can sue the sue them to the court.

Marta Basystiuk   17:30
Mhm.

INT11   17:44
Yeah, that we have a Chanel on that, but it's not normal for for citizens because they feel like they they need to contribute their their times, their efforts, or maybe their costs to deal with the cost because every time you sue the.
You sue the government agency, state agency with the court. It always takes time. For example, I used to do once I I used to sue the election Commission because they kind of disclose the information that they they they need. No, sorry, they they don't give the information.

Marta Basystiuk   18:06
OK.

INT11   18:20
That they need to disclose, but it takes 1 1/2 year to run along that process. So I don't think it's normal things that normal citizen can do, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   18:22
Mhm.
Perfect. Can I ask you about the complaint mechanism? Because you mentioned the non-governmental checks that can be used as a mechanism to influence, to influence, to guide governments in in their decision-making processes.

INT11   18:39
OK.

Marta Basystiuk   18:47
I will just give you some of our data and I will ask you what do you think about it? Our data says that confidence in complaint mechanisms have weakened and I'm wondering if you agree with that, with that trend and if someone has a problem with the public.
Authority, you already mentioned that they would either go to court or they will, they will resort to seeking help from civil society. But I was wondering in general, would you perceive complaint mechanism as effective in Thailand or not?

INT11   19:28
I think for now it's not I I would give you a backdown. In the past we have another channel that if we have a kind of collective power, we can do that for example in the in the past constitution.
There's there's a article that if people what they see that any state agency, I think if some state agency doesn't work effectively or not responsible for the people, they can get better with 10 thousands.
Signature to propose that to the Parliament, but after the amendment of this current constitution, this article disappear. So right now we we think it's a kind of a good complaint mechanism. We want to get it back at least we can gather together.
Get it back at least we can gather together with 10,000 signature and proposed to the parliament to kind of do the function of check and balance. So right now as I told you, we have only way that's going to the court and they take a lot of effort and.
Actually right now I think some kind of progressive agencies, they're try to use the, they try to create a complaint shut down within that organization. For example, they have kind of compliance committee that.
Use the third party to to include in this committee to get kind of appealing and has a formal how to say that the public and formal deliberation on this issue but it.
I think it's very rarely in Thailand, not I think maybe just two to 5% of the agencies that try to do this because it's not normal here.

Marta Basystiuk   21:18
Mhm.
So it's not the national requirement, it's up for the agencies to decide. OK, that's great. Let's then move on to the freedom of expression because you you mentioned that there is some issues with the the enjoyment of this right.

INT11   21:31
Yeah, yeah, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   21:44
We are seeing from our data that there are some differences between the perceptions of experts and then general public. Experts tend to think that the situation has worsened in recent years, similarly to what you said. At the same time, general public reported some improvements.

INT11   21:58
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   22:04
And if you can, if you can give us some of your observation, if you can explain us the gap between these two assessments, that would be great. Why do you think people can have a more positive?
Observation of how this right is exercised in practice.

INT11   22:25
Mm-hmm. I I think just like I said at the beginning, if you don't deal with some sensitive issues or deal with the like people with a bot influence, it's OK because right now we.
We have a social media. Yeah, everyone can do that. We can gather in physically in the public space if you kind of just ask the permission from the kind of how to say that the the authority.
He was responsible for that. I think it's it's better right now but I think that people said is not alive with the data set because that that the point I said because if you talk with the sensitivity I don't know if in you know that in Thailand we have.
The kind of strong Les Majeste law. If you talk about the monarchy in any way, you can have a chance to go to prison. Even you share the message or the news that relate to that. Yeah, you can do that. That's that. And we have, I think people going to.
Jail because of the issue every single month. So that's yeah, that that's hard and because the law itself provide a broad definition of.
Violation. For example, they don't define which barrier you cannot cross. Yeah, and in the past there are variation of of case that we cannot see the battle what is exactly serious.
ohh what can they do? So right now the problem is people feel like they should avoid saying anything about the monarchy, even for the media. And the situation last month, no last year, that the constitutional
Caught say that even political parties cannot do that in campaigning. I don't know if you know about the situation. One political party in Thailand get got resolved because of this issue and a lot of politician got banned because they campaigned.

Marta Basystiuk   24:48
Mhm.

INT11   24:57
Campaign about the amendment of this law last year. So right now they set the new barrier that even the political parties cannot press it as the campaign to kind of in the election and when.

Marta Basystiuk   25:00
Mhm.

INT11   25:15
When they go to the Parliament, which is, which should be a space that they can deliberate about this law, they some conservative party said that we cannot do that because the Constitutional Court already made the decision. They have the sentence that this.
Issue is very sensitive, not do that and even for the people, for the media, when we see that so many have we raised the question that should we post that on the news, should we kind of arrange the public conversation about that so.

Marta Basystiuk   25:37
Yeah.

INT11   25:53
That's one thing. And the other thing, even it's not about the the monarchy, about the kind of people in the kind of position in power, I think last year as well.
When you kind of try to scrutinize some, some, I don't know how to call him. He is not exactly parliamentarian, but he runs the political parties and at the same time he's he runs the business about the energy in our.
Country and somebody said that they linked to the scammer or linked to the kind of money laundering and even media. A lot of media try to scrutinize this.

Marta Basystiuk   26:30
Mhm.

INT11   26:46
This issue, The thing is the media, all the media that linked to that that screenization, they get so and they need to go on the kind of justice process for a long time. Yeah. So I think overall we don't have.
We have a sensitive issue here that we cannot talk to. The second thing is even the vineyard cannot even the vineyard can get so and they don't feel safe if they need to deal with either sensitive issue or a big company or the big the big guys who do who has a lot of power and unlimited
Resource. And for this season, if they see this then that even the parliamentarian, even the media can get the effects of criticize on this issue, they stop talking about that, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   27:39
And when it comes for specific groups that can be affected, can you single out anyone in terms of their socioeconomic status, ethnicity, nationality, religion? Do you think that there are any barriers to some specific groups inside of the country?
Because of any of those factors.

INT11   28:03
Mm.

Marta Basystiuk   28:06
Or you can say that everyone is treated equally and everyone is.

INT11   28:08
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. With with this system, I think that everyone, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   28:14
Mm-hmm. OK. Thank you so much and.

INT11   28:16
Can can I add on something? Because when you ask this question, I try to think even the people in the upper middle class, they may don't have to fear about going to the court. But for me, I think not only the the system that put a pressure on them, I think the social norm because in Highland.

Marta Basystiuk   28:19
Absolutely.
Um.

INT11   28:36
And uh.
I perceive that so many times the social pressure has a lot of effects on that because for example, right now we have a trends of nationalism come up again after our issue about with the Cambodia border.
And if you are a position in the kind of you are a public figure, you are a upper middle class in the kind of your your social cycle and you said that you question the the military.
The armed force that leads to kind of negative feedback from others because they they might feel like why do you anti military? Because right now they protect us for example. I don't know how to explain that but but because we don't.
Afraid of going to the court, but we fear that what other people think about us if we said some issue that might be have another different opinion on the society, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   29:43
That's an excellent further explanation of the censorship issues that unfortunately you are dealing with. And it's good to know that it's not just one group of people, but it's specific topics and then when it comes to those in monarchy or those who are in power or.

INT11   29:46
Yeah.
Yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   30:03
Influential, like a person who is running the political groups or the military. So it's it's very helpful for our research. Then I'd like to ask you about the freedom of assembly and association. We are seeing some gradual improvements when it comes to this particular right.
Respondents say that they can organize around issues, that they can attend meeting, that they can join political groups. Do you agree with this assessment? And do you think that people are genuinely able to organize, join groups, protest peacefully?

INT11   30:23
Mhm.
Yeah, I totally agree with that. We see a kind of obvious case during this past month because we're going to have the referendum in the next actually next week and it's a referendum asking about.
We should revise or amend the constitution. And right now we have both opinions. Some may say yes, some may say no. But both of the group can campaign it and there are a lot of campaigning right now, even for these completing issues.

Marta Basystiuk   31:03
Mhm.

INT11   31:19
So comparing to the past, I think 10 years or no 20 years that we have the referendum about the current constitution, we cannot do that. Yeah, because the government is that kind of arrest the people who going to the street and campaign.
For that, that's the kind of the example. And it's not just the NGO who do that right now. It's even you are a citizen in the community and you feel like you want to kind of arrange the state, right? For example, running club for support this campaign can do that even in dealing with the.
Political issues and not only this big event, but if you go, if you come to Thailand and you go to any government agencies, you can see a gathering of people in front of the ministry to protest for some issue. For example, I used to see the farm.
group protest in front of the the cabinet office. Yeah, last week or the Ministry of Finance, they gather together, they have a ten and even if they provide the police to kind of help them to ensure that security during the protest. So I think it's
a lot after we passed the military government. So yeah, it endorse us and we have the the bill to endorse that as well. I cannot remember the name, but it said that people have the right to do that. They They can ask the permission from the state. Actually, it's just like

Marta Basystiuk   32:57
Mm.

INT11   32:58
To inform the state and the state have the rights that the state has a duty to provide the support on the on the security system on that, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   33:08
Sounds perfect. Then I'll circle back to to the question about different groups. So in general, not only with respect to the freedom of assembly and association, but also with respect to.
Right to information, freedom of expression. Do you think there are any groups that left out? For example, I mentioned different minorities, ethnicities, but maybe rural communities or older people or migrants. You mentioned that there is some tensions at the border. Do you think that any of these?
Group can can be somehow limited in in what they are able to do with respect to any aspects of civic participation.

INT11   33:54
Yeah, I I don't have the direct experience, but to my knowledge, some marginalized group, rural immigrant or even disabled people, they if they don't stay in a kind of capital like Bangkok, I think they're still.
To face some barrier on that, I personally I don't think because.
I think mainly is because they don't know they have the right to do that. So The thing is they try to avoid doing something that tackle with the state or with the government or with the authority because they don't know how.

Marta Basystiuk   34:26
Mhm.

INT11   34:38
How, how far can they do, how far can they go? And in that rural area especially, I don't think we have a kind of a strong civic movement to help them to do that as well. I can give you the example right now because for example that.
That the referendum campaign that right now we're running. First we focus only on the big city, but when we go to the kind of rural area, no, no one active on this or no one even know about that. We can do that.
But when we send some volunteer to to to to explain them this is our rights according to according to the law, they start doing that. I think they just want someone to support or let them acknowledge their rights so they can rise up and do that.

Marta Basystiuk   35:31
Thank you so much. Annemarie, do you want to jump in? Do you have any questions that I'm that I'm missing that that you'd like to or do you want me to proceed?

INT11   35:34
Yeah.

Ana Maria Montoya   35:44
No, go ahead. Yes.

Marta Basystiuk   35:45
Actually, I'd like to ask you, Gigi, do you have time? Because we are at 40 minutes. I know that we mentioned that the interview will be short. So the question is before we move in, do you have more time for a few questions or you'd rather us to wrap up?

INT11   35:59
Uh.
Uh, sure. I I kind of, uh, schedule one hour for this meeting, so it's OK.

Marta Basystiuk   36:08
Thank you. Thank you very much. I know that you mentioned I'm always going back to digitalization and inclusion because it's the area that I'm very interested in and since you are building and you have experience in talking to people who are building different civil civic tech tools.

INT11   36:18
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   36:26
I was just wondering whether do you think digitalization has strengthened transparency and accountability overall, or do you think it created any risks? And if if any, please explain which ones.

INT11   36:41
Yeah, for for if access to government or state information, I think digital authorization helps a lot because not only we can get the data to kind of create our tools or monitor or analog.

Marta Basystiuk   36:54
Thank you.

INT11   37:01
on that. But I think even the process of decision making by the state itself will be more transparent. For example, we like to push them to use the E procurement process. Right now we're dealing with a lot of documentation, the paper documents.
But if you I try to propose the the government if they use the digital process on that first you can I think I think they can work more efficient. They don't need to find out for one month to do the just to do the TOR or recruitment process and.

Marta Basystiuk   37:37
Mhm.

INT11   37:41
The other thing is if you do that you can open to the public even real time I think because they will kind of undoubt your DDC, sorry your decision for example if if they say that the kind of a supplier what they propose and.
You why you choose this? I think it's it's good for them itself. So I think it's it's it's OK, but I don't think only digital tools works. I think we need the kind of.
Physical way to work along, for example, especially with the the issue that need to deal with the group of people. I can give you example that in Thailand right now we try to introduce the concept of participatory.
budgeting in in each community, in each province, small province in Thailand. The problem is, uh I think that the authority tried to adopt the instant tools that the federal create, but they just push it on the website.
Is is a barrier to some citizen in the area. Even in Bangkok in the past year we have idea of no we have the plan of community budget and Bangkok administration they ask the people to kind of submit.
That project only on the website, but it lacks of the public forum. So I think only limited people can do that on the website or know how to do that. But for example, if my mom want to do that, they need to ask me to help her to do.
So I think it's not that inclusive if you do only digital format for participation and yeah, we we still have a kind of a digital divide in our country. It doesn't mean people cannot access to Internet to the phone, but I think the literacy when they need to make a decision.
And yeah, that's the problem. Another issue that come up with me is that the thing I mentioned about the Social Security fund, which covers a lot of citizens in Thailand. Right now they do the public hearing, but The thing is they create a Google form and post on their website only. And yeah, for example.

Marta Basystiuk   40:10
Mhm.

INT11   40:12
My yeah, my cousin, they stay outside Bangkok and they don't have a lot of time. They don't know how to do that. They never used the Google phone before, but they wanna kind of give the feedback on that because they feel like some issue can kind of.
And of FX they rise in the future, but they cannot do that. So I think it is good, but you need to do along the way with other practice or our other way when you deal with public participation.

Marta Basystiuk   40:48
Thank you so much and thank you for pointing. That was my next question. I wanted to ask you about any initiatives or reforms that you would think have done the most in terms of in terms of improving transparency and meaningful participation, but you've already said.

INT11   40:54
Yeah.
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   41:06
About some aspects of digitalization that needs to be spread towards the entire country, not just in big cities, and that more initiatives are important. So it's it's very helpful for us. I'm staying within the area of civic participation and access to information and.

INT11   41:14
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   41:26
Something that is relevant from civic and political rights, but I I'm curious whether you whether there is anything from the list of questions that I sent that you think is important for us to discuss, but I haven't mentioned it.

INT11   41:43
Uh.

Marta Basystiuk   41:45
I don't know how comfortable you are with the discussing questions on labor rights, property or justice.

INT11   41:51
Yeah, I try to think about that as well and I discuss with my team, but the problem is because we we are not working on that issue and I would say that because we are a small company, so we don't have the experience much about that. So maybe I can skip that, but one thing I.

Marta Basystiuk   42:00
Mhm.

INT11   42:11
I I'm interested when I show the guiding question with my team and we discussed that a lot is the topic of the independence, judiciary independence. So yeah, I think one question regarding that, yeah.
I think for us in Thai society and even us who work directly with the political or social participation issue, I think that's a big concern of us because right now maybe.

Marta Basystiuk   42:40
Mhm.

INT11   42:43
One point is a big issue about that the Constitutional Court that I talk, I mentioned about some issues on that because right now the the action of the Constitutional Court affects a lot in the belief in the democracy in Thailand.
Because they feel like even they go for votes and even the party they choose, they elect, win, won the election. Just a small group of people can kind of demolish everything we we did.
During that big day, because they have the price to dissolve the political party and not only dissolvement of the political party, recently we talking about redesign our constitution, the amendment of that.
And the Constitutional Court can say that no, you cannot elect your drafting committee directly, but you need to do it another way. So at with that level, we feel like.
Why? Why the access? And even that is a threat. They are a threat to our belief in democracy. So that's the issue. And another issue is I would say in Thailand we we see a lot of cases even for the normal citizen, but like I said, the race.
The rich people did a lot of serious issue. For example, they kind of drive, drink and drive, so they crash the people and then kill the people, but a lot of them kind of.
They they they went through the justice process, but we said we can observe that comparing to other case, the case of a delay and then finally people don't get any information about that. So we feel like if we can rely on the justice system or.
They got influence. They can got influenced by politics. They can got influenced by the people with money. Yeah. And if they are really corrupted, yeah. So I think that's the thing.
And.
Because of also because of the process, for example, if we feel like we scrutinize some public authority or even politician and we try to sue them. So many how we need to fight a lot with the justice system itself. For example, we need to go go to the court 10 times a month.
So it's not possible for us and actually I used to uh did the research with the.
What's the name? Thailand Institute of Justice is a public king tank for the justice in Thailand and they say like I found the information that a lot of people try to. I don't know what what is the technical term, but they withdraw, they decide to withdraw.
They're appealing at some stage because they don't have the money, they don't have the time, they don't have the resource to fight with it anymore. So for me, it's just like people feel like they're hopeless about the justice system in our country because they don't know if they work.
For some group of people or they work for other citizen, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   46:19
G Jane, can I please ask you to clarify this perception of the lack of independence, impartiality, the lack of effectiveness and fairness in adjudicating the case? Does it concern justice, both civil and criminal, or one of them?
Do you think that one of them is doing better than the other one, or not?

INT11   46:43
I think civil is better because I don't know, maybe that doesn't affect people a lot. And yeah, but mostly that we deal with is the criminal case and criminal heart, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   47:01
Sounds perfect. I will be wrapping up the conversation unless Ana Marie wants to ask any questions. Just checking.

Ana Maria Montoya   47:07
Yes, I just it has been super interesting. Thank you so much for sharing all your knowledge and experience and and perceptions. It's super helpful. We will be sharing with you.
If we decide to quote any of of your of your thoughts, we will show you before publishing that. So just to get your agreement and and we will make sure that if you are not, if you don't agree we can anonymize that and just.
In like include you in the general acknowledgements. I I just have a an additional question and it's regarding. So we we are now in the first wave interviewing experts because our the closest.

INT11   47:45
Yeah.

Ana Maria Montoya   47:56
Like organizations and and and also academics in some cases that we know and that we can get in contact, but unfortunately we are not on the ground in the country. So we were wondering if you by any chance do you have any referrals that you can share with us?

INT11   48:08
Mhm.
OK.

Marta Basystiuk   50:07
Yeah, I have one final question that is my favorite. I'm all I'm asking all of the interviewees to, if they can, to describe the situation in human in the human rights area in one sentence. What would it be? It's the quote that we would like to use. I know I put you on the spot, but if you can give us one sentence.

INT11   50:21
Mhm.
Uh huh.

Marta Basystiuk   50:27
That would be very helpful.

INT11   50:29
I would say right now I think is fundamentally OK, but there's a lot of things we should improve.

Marta Basystiuk   50:42
Excellent. Thank you so much. I'm also seconding what Ana Maria just said. We are very grateful for your time. I know that you're devoting your time on pro bono basis and we really appreciate it for the next step. Ana Maria is leading the project and she will send you the final report when it's ready and.
Is online and in the meantime, if we have any questions, just to make sure that we accurately reflect all of your insights, we will also, if you don't mind, keep in touch with you. I promise it will be a brief kind of check in if necessary, just.
Just to make sure that everything is accurate, but we greatly appreciate your time and hope you have the the great rest of your day.

INT11   51:27
Yeah, thank you. And sorry for I think right now today I'm a bit confused maybe because it's morning and I'm very kind of busy during this time because the election is coming. So I don't prepare, but if you need more.
Information. Please feel free to contact me maybe via e-mail or a big call. I'd appreciate to help that.
Thank you.

Marta Basystiuk   51:51
Gigi, it was excellent. Yes, you you gave us so many good, excellent examples that provide, you know, like additional arguments why there is this type of trends that we are seeing and that's exactly what we needed. So please don't, don't think that we need it more from you. I'm a bit concerned that we took an entire.
Hour instead of 30 minutes that we planned. So we greatly appreciate your time and expertise.

Ana Maria Montoya   52:13
Yes.

INT11   52:14
Mhm.
Yeah. And yeah. And I used to talk to you, yeah.

Ana Maria Montoya   52:18
Thank you.

Marta Basystiuk   52:20
Yep. OK. See you. Bye.

Ana Maria Montoya   52:21
Thank you very much. Bye.

INT11   52:22
Thank you. Bye-bye.

