INTERVIEW CODE 05

Marta Basystiuk   3:27
Perfect.
You absolutely, yes. Actually it goes beyond to our four areas that the report will cover. So I'm very excited. I usually start with the general, I call it icebreaker question and either of you can reply or both of you depending on your preference.
Could you please share your assessment of the current state of fundamental right? And if you could also share some key development that you think stand out in 2025 2026, we would also be very grateful to hear about that.
You can be as specific or as general as you'd like. It's just the first general question to steer our conversation.

INT07   4:11
Indeed, it really depends on which topic we we talk about because there are some progress in in some areas and there also some drawback in several other areas as well. But in general if compare with right after the military cool like 10 years ago.
There's a lot of development if we compare with what happened back then at least there's a lot of mechanism under the parliament in which we could go through, but like of the military coup because they're just handpicked.
Parliamentary and by the military, so it's hard to even advocate for law reform. It's hard to advocate even on certain cases also when it come to just it system.
It is a lot better now as well because at rather military cool they use military court like in many cases. So I I I would say that's like come kind of you know many be compared to the the the post cool time.
But if it some other is really depends on on the topic. For example, we could see some small development in term of business and human rights. There start to be like in Thailand they would like to be a member of OECD, so they start talking about.
You know, legally formed on several areas. So that's why we see some of men on gender issue. You might have heard that just an introduction of sexual harassment, not introduction adoptions, an enactment of the sexual harassment law. So why? Why is not perfect?
It's a development there or entitled to enforced disappearance. While we can't say there's a lot of development in that area, the fact that we already have the law, we have several mechanisms under the law is a welcome step anyway.
So.
That's sounds small. Do you all, I would say in the earlier that we're working on and probably think you want to talk a bit about SNAP and human right offenders.

INT06   6:15
Yeah, yeah. I think actually as as Kay mentioned, we see development even it's not like progress, you know, but we have law and we have solo draft that we are going to to.
Actually the law should pass already but because of the unstable or political as you see. So we have to like we are going to have a new election soon. So some of the laws still pending. So we we don't know what's going on with that draft law. Actually we have to we have so many law.
By life example the anti celeb law. Actually this law it to protect the one who the one who exploit or like use the freedom of like.
Expression to protect public interests. So this is we we we try to be the the law that pro that protect but now we don't know what's going on. But if this law is passed we will see the progress for sure. But for me even we see the progress in law but I also see many.
Difficulty in term of implementation, especially for the implementator itself. For some of them doesn't have even they have a power to use the law, but because the law sometime is not unclear enough for them to use that. So this is I think this is the problem that we have to working.
On a lot and also raising a venue. We say that now we are open space for CSO to work in Thailand and this is very good, but because of the the crisis happened, so now the CSO space quite limited, not because of the country but because of the funding and budget that CSO.
Well, many CSO like cut the budget was cut now. Yeah, this is I, I, I, I, I see the the the trend in Thailand, yeah.

INT07   8:14
So, so the drawback is on uh, also Civic space, CSO and lesma test, I would say.

INT06   8:19
Mhm, mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   8:21
Thank you so much for your extended replies, both of you. And I think it's a great segue or I'd like to pick up more specifically on civic participation since you've already mentioned about it. I will refer reference our data and then I will ask what you think about our data, but if you don't.
Don't feel comfortable with providing us explanations. You can tell us just you what is your experience on it. So according to our data, civic space is declining over the last five years. Civic space, I mean civic participation.
And from your perspective, how would you describe the current environment for civic participation overall? We've already mentioned that there are some constraints on budget. You've mentioned alluded to SLAP, but if you can expand, expand a little bit more and elaborate the underlying factors.
That restrict the civic environment in Thailand, I would be grateful.

INT07   9:23
If you compare with the pre COVID, sorry.

Marta Basystiuk   9:24
And.
I'm sorry, yes. And before that, my apologies. Do you agree with what our data shows that in in general civic participation is declining?

INT07   9:38
Yeah, I I meant if you compare with the pre COVID time, it is declining like compared to five years ago, it's declining because at that time is the moment when there's a lot of people that went out in protest, you know?
But uh.
I agree that I want to say it depends on which moment that you would like to to compare it it with because the graph of civic spending time was probably like this. So if you talk about 10 years ago it is even it's worse than what it.
It is now. If you talk about five years ago, you know when there's a mass protest, the youth protest, the pro democracy protest. At that time, it seems like they they were more like a.
Opening space. But it's not built opening civic space five years ago, because after that a lot of people were subject to legal actions. It just came several years after that, like you didn't realize that the space that you thought you had back then five years ago.
It's not real. So probably I'm I'm not sure whether we could say it's very decrying because probably we didn't have it from the beginning. It's just some time we thought we had it, but once we realized it.
The legal actions, uh, against political activists coming non-stop. Yeah. So yeah, so I I think that's that's my opinion about it.

Marta Basystiuk   11:20
Mhm.
Thank you so much. Yep, please go ahead.

INT06   11:22
And I I think I agree with Gaye. We I I think we cannot we cannot tour that this the civic space is decline or not because the situation is seem is already declining then even we have so so many law to protect but the law doesn't use and we have so a law.
To to slap back people like let's say the Computer Clam Acts for example. Even now they are like a man already and Public Assembly Act is also the one that also stop people and also and.
The and criminal defamation law, this is one of concern that we are like advocates for people still have a criminal charge if they pull something online, you know and the political party or the the business, the business side also use the.
Is to to protect themselves, let's say, but it should not be like that. So that's why we say that like criminal defamation should not.
Have when we say about something that like to protect public interest or something in a good fit, yes.

Marta Basystiuk   12:39
Many thanks. I'm particularly very thankful for explicit examples on legislation that is currently putting pressure on, I believe the general public creates censorship and pressures on civil society in general.
I'd like to break down the civic participation because even in our measurement it include includes a couple of rights. So if you don't mind, I will ask you a question about freedom of expression that I think you also alluded to.
This is the area where we see differences between opinions of experts and the general population. Our experts think that the situation has worsened when it comes to freedom of expression. At the same time, the general public reports some improvements.
I was wondering what is your assessment of this right? Do you agree with the expert or the general public? And if you explain us why, it would be great.

INT07   13:39
Um.
I would say I more agree with yes one, but I'm not sure whether, as I say, I'm not sure whether it wasn't or it it it always like it because.
The problem in Thailand is, is that because the law is very big and overbought. So at one point in time, like two or three years after this, the authority could also pick up something you spoke two years ago, you know, and prosecuted you.
So at this moment people might not feel that they are restricted, but because of the law open door for some abuse, further abuse in in the future. So I I meant in the next 2-3 years.
Um.
You know, things that they say could be picked up and prosecuted. And because this happened with the protest movement, uh, many cases were brought by authority after three or four years, you know? So if you ask people in general, they feel like, yeah, it's, I mean, it's, it's.
It's getting better unless they start to come after them on any issues. So I mean in in in chart because of the non-human right complaints law.
I'm not sure we truly have a better civic space in the country in the country ever.

Marta Basystiuk   15:13
That's something that our one of our experts, because we've already conducted a couple of interviews, he also mentioned the same reason. He's basically said that there are topics that we need to take into account that might.

INT06   15:14
Mm.

Marta Basystiuk   15:29
Change the perception on this topic and when it comes to discussing something that relates to the monarchy, to the military, to those in power, that's when you see tensions and that's where the freedom of expression will be constrained. So I believe that you have the same stance on this issue.

INT07   15:48
Yeah, and big companies as well, because there's a lot of snap case for the big companies, so.

INT06   15:49
Yeah.
Yeah, and yeah.
Yeah. And I also like, so this is for my opinion. So I think now it's very risky then if CSO say that now they are have like many spare to talk. So that is mean that they don't aware that.
They can like sue, you know? So that's why this is also the thing that we have to raise a venue. Hey, even you have rice, but not fully the rice, so you have.
Yes, you you more likely to be charged under criminal law if you don't know exactly. So that's why this case it happened a lot. I think people say that they have right to say and then they have, they have like the the the charge against them. So I think this thing we have to.
Consider and to to to look to to to protect the civic space. No. Yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   16:53
Many thanks, ****. And I was wondering when it comes to specific groups inside of your country, whether we are thinking about their socioeconomic status, their ethnicity, nationality and so on, do you think that there are any specific groups that are more affected and they are more constrained?
With regards to their right of expression or right to assembly and right to association, or it's just the constraints are stemming from particular topics and everyone is equal.

INT07   17:31
My brand workers, always the group that has been sorely constrained when it comes to with the right to assembly or expirations, because of course, I mean they are at risk of being arrested for violating the Immigration Act.
And unfortunately, most of the workers in Thailand were undocumented and they're undocumented because of the structural barriers as well. It's not just because of them want to come undocumented. So I would say that's the.

Marta Basystiuk   17:55
OK.

INT07   18:05
The top, the the most affected, the most affected groups. And of course I mean indigenous people, the people in this way, like people in the Deep South or huge tribe communities, another group that has been.
Uh, pretty much restricted as well. I mean in the Deep South, the Malay Muslim community is because of the law in place in the South because they have security law that 24/7 in which.
They can't just host the protest. Basically it's like the military state now there and same as I mean for huge tribal communities they have other type restrictions like they have movement restrictions they.
Uh, still don't. Many of, I mean not many now. It's like a several of them still haven't yet obtained the Tai citizenship, so it's risky for them to come out as well. So I think this group is one of the most.
Target that when they come to A.

Marta Basystiuk   19:15
Many thanks. That's very important. I'm sorry, Tig, do you want to add anything?

INT06   19:17
Yeah.
Yeah, I I also add a little bit from Kay because Kay also mentioned the indigenous people that is not about that right, but indigenous people in Thailand, especially now we have the mega project in the Southern Economic Corridor.
Is called I I sorry Gay I I cannot remember but that that area we are the government allowed that to have to make a project and in that area we have.
Quite a number of indigenous people and it's even worse because some of them cannot understand Thai. So one come to the public hearing about the project so they always ignore or they have to fake like public hearing.
Something like that. This is also one of the concern that I think we should take on take into consideration, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   20:19
Thank you so much. You both mentioned so many different points, but I got excited about hearing the reference to labor law. Kate, do you mind if I ask you a couple of questions? Because usually our experts were not.
Experts in that area. So I I just got excited for a second that we can delve in deeper. OK, so our data suggests that Thailand performance on labour law has declined and we are comparing from 2020 to 2026.
At the same time, when we try to analyse the survey responses from the public, it shows that the large majority of workers say that they are free to form unions, they are free to negotiate with their employers.
And I'm wondering what is the current reality of labour rights? I'm I'm seeing you nodding that you're disagreeing. So if you can tell us more why you think differently and if you can please elaborate on the key.
Arguments why you have this stance.

INT07   21:28
Yeah, let me start with the migrant workers then, because I I think that's about as the problems lie. Migrant workers can't form their own unions.
So I I that's one of the big problem as well because I at at most they could just join some other union. Yeah. So that's the first things. Second is subcontractors, subcontractors.
Couldn't join the unions in which they work on. They could just just go and set up union for their own companies, the subcontracting companies. So that mean they can't talk about.
The work conditions, the actual work conditions that they they experience. So Mcgrain workers, subcontractors are the two groups who whose right to form unions and sometimes even take part in any unions are severely restricted both in law and in practice.
We can share you the report on special economic zone which we talk about and also in reality even for Thai workers why they may form unions but in reality is so difficult because.
When they, for example, when they submit an application to form the unions, the authority will check with their employer with this is your employee or not and then the employer know and when they know they will start to use all the tactic you know to.
To stop these people from forming unions, I'll probably try to get rid of them basically from the companies and many of the unions leader were under pressures and.
Of course, from the employers, there are several cases that we could record it, including in that report as well about unfair, what do you call it, this amazing of these.
People will. And in addition to that, the general public perception about the right to strike about being in unions is not positive. So recently there's a case about the.
The unions, I can't remember the companies, it's probably air conditioning companies or something like a big companies and they try to think all the worker like protest and also strike and.
The happy conception on on on on what they did was very, very negative. It's very bad. So yeah.
There's still a lot of problems, including law and in practice, when it comes to the right to form unions, the right to strike, right to association in general.

Marta Basystiuk   24:41
Thank you so much. And can you please elaborate what specific challenges in labor rights are the most acute? You mentioned that people want to join the union or they want to participate in, they want to form or participate in the union, but what makes them go there? What they want to protect, whether the.
Problem lies in the working conditions or wages or safety, protection from discrimination, everything. If you can please elaborate so that we can get better sense of what is the problem.

INT07   25:10
It's mostly on, yeah, mostly on wages, sometime on working condition as well. I think that's the two, the most popular issues, you know, for for unions.

INT06   25:25
Yeah, I also would like to add a little bit on the actually as Kay mentioned to be a migrant worker is is very impossible. Sorry to say that to have the the the union because Thailand not.

Marta Basystiuk   25:27
Right.

INT06   25:41
They also see the migrant worker as a threat to national security. This is my set still have there. So that's why they never ratified the IRO convention. This is from the size of the government, but not not the government, but also the perception of the.
Business size, yeah. Because if they, if they give the power, it's mean that the the migrant worker will like empower, you know. So that's why this is a way of like suppress this group of people. Yeah, this is for my.

Marta Basystiuk   26:12
Yep.

INT06   26:17
Perspective, yeah. And even in the Thai company itself, it's also very hard for the worker, as I mentioned, to form a union because in the company they also, they also have the worker union, but it's under the company structure and under the company structure.
They provide benefit and you know and that's why I have a chance to to to have a discussion with the represent of worker union in the company and no one relied us or no one like ignore that we should join the we should join the trade union because we have the.
Perfect worker union. Everyone can come and then raise a complaint. Something like that, yeah.

INT07   27:02
Yeah, yeah, I I just shared the link of the report, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   27:03
Thank you so much.
Yeah.
And maybe final question on the worker's right, if you can briefly assess the effectiveness of the complaint mechanism for with respect to labor rights in general or worker's right, what do you think about it? Is it effective? Is there?
Specific reforms or areas of cooperation to make it more.
Sorry for that making more effective or do you think that there are any institutional changes that are needed to be done in that respect? Where do usually workers go when the problem arise?
Would be.

INT07   27:51
Indeed, that's not. Yeah, that's not many places. Worker could go when when that's arrived. But but I mean, that's of course there's Social Security, right? Maybe the big news in Thailand now, but.
Many times, I mean in in in China because under Social Security the workers could could could have access to like healthcare, also some pensions, you know, something like that, so.
That's where workers normally relies on, but there's not many other places they could go apart from social securities and even most for migrant workers, because at the same time when we talk about migrant worker, many of them were undocumented.
So if anything happened is very, very almost no, no presence they could go. They normally just been to NGOs for documented migrant workers.
Who wish to work in Thailand, many of them, some of them could have access to Social Security, but many of them, they just have to board a healthcare coverage that provide by the Thai government, so have to pay extra.
To be able to access to some of the benefits. So I would say there's a a lot of a lot of problems that is depend on it. So we talk about Thai worker, migrant worker and when we talk about migrant workers, it's dependent. We talk about undocumented undocumented workers, but.
The ones that is the biggest problem now would be, I would say, the undocumented migrant workers who almost have no access to anything.

INT06   29:47
Yeah, yeah. And I also would like to add a bit about the the, the progressive, I mean like in term of the the labor court. Actually when the worker come to the labor court, the labor court also have the judgment flavor on the on on the labor on the.

Marta Basystiuk   29:48
Thank you so much. I will.

INT06   30:07
Labor. But again, as Kaemin Chan, if you are undocumented, how can you go to the labor court? You know? Yeah. Even it it said that it's separate, you know? Yeah, yeah.

INT07   30:16
I mean you you could go, but but they will send you back. They'll deport you, you know, I mean they they they will prosecute. I mean they will work on the cases, you know, but in the meantime you not allowed to stay in Thailand. So that's the problem with the labour court.

INT06   30:22
That.

Marta Basystiuk   30:33
So what I'm hearing is when whenever disputes arise that there are no effective mechanisms for migrant workers.

INT07   30:43
Then yeah, if they has no status unless it's trafficking cases. So because yeah, sorry, sorry.

Marta Basystiuk   30:46
But for the sorry and for for the citizens of Thailand, they usually resort to administrative bodies or they would go to the courts to.

INT07   30:59
Labour court because labour court is free and you know I mean administrative court is is is free as well. But when it come to labour dispute people will go to labour court is free. They have oh indeed probably this one is a development because it's free and they also have some.

Marta Basystiuk   31:02
OK, they will resume.

INT07   31:18
Lawyers who stationed there to provide free service, you know, so in general labor cost is OK, but undocumented migrants.

Marta Basystiuk   31:28
Well, what can I say?

INT06   31:29
And we have a lot here. Yeah, we have a lot of the documents. So that's the problem.

INT07   31:31
It's a million. It's like million to million. Yeah, a lot.

Marta Basystiuk   31:38
And we will read more in the report that you shared with us, correct, about this information. Yeah, perfect. Thank you so much.

INT07   31:44
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. I think we didn't, we didn't write a lot about labor court, but there's an issue of labor unions. There's the issue of, yeah, everything, Social Security and everything.

Marta Basystiuk   31:51
Social rights. Perfect.

INT06   31:52
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   31:56
I believe we can move on to the justice system, unless you'd like to cover some of the questions from political, social rights, political and civil rights, I'm sorry, and then public participation. Would you be OK with moving on to justice system?

INT07   32:12
Yeah, yeah, yeah. I I think that topic probably a lot of the people you interview already answered. There's a lot of about that, so.

INT06   32:18
Yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   32:19
OK.
Sounds great. So according to our data, what we are seeing, we have observed that there are stronger safeguards in criminal justice and more challenges in civil justice and I'm curious to know.
Does this reflect your experience? And if comparing them isn't quite relevant to your role, please feel free to focus only on one system. You can choose civil or criminal, but I'd love to hear what you see as key improvements, key strengths, key weaknesses we should know about.

INT07   32:58
Um.
You meant safe? Yeah, sorry. Please repeat.

Marta Basystiuk   33:01
Do you agree that the, yeah, sorry, it's like my first question was according to our WGP data, we see stronger safeguards in criminal justice, some improvements and at the same time we see more declines in in civil justice. Would you agree with that?
General's assessment.

INT07   33:25
Because of indeed our work focus on criminal justice, so probably we are not the best person to compare between criminal and civil justice system, but on the issue we work on when it comes to criminal justice.
System. We still see the very classic problem about the over alliance on criminal law in the Thai justice system and in the Thai public like for example.
When there's a defamation case, you could pick to go to criminal or civil right under Thai law. And people would just always go to criminal law because they thought that, OK, I want to do it bad, I want to make it worse. So you should be subject to prison sentence.
So we use criminal law in and many times this happened like case like information should just go to like a civil channel generally. But it's always came to criminal channel. Almost all of them you just use criminal law.
And the criminal justice system couldn't respond to that. I mean, they couldn't just stop those strain or pattern. They even introduced the law that allow, for example, the anti-slap or the so-called anti-slap.
Provisions under the Criminal Procedure Court that has just been introduced 5-6 years ago in which equip the judges with the power to dismiss the case early on. If they thought that all this is not the case, this was brought in bad fat.
But the judge haven't exercised those power at all. So there's an introduction of safeguard, like for example the one I just mentioned, the anti synapse safeguard, but it hasn't been used. So by law there's progress, but in practice.
That's not much when it comes to the criminal justice system. It's basically on this topic that we talk about defamation slap, you know.

Marta Basystiuk   35:30
And usually people will resort to criminal justice system, not because it's more effective, but because they want to punish the defender, whoever the defender is. Aye, because it's.

INT07   35:40
Yeah, and because it's free, it's free as well because you just have to go to the police and police do the rest of the things for you. So that mean we are using taxpayer money on defamation case like private defamation.

INT06   35:43
Yeah.
Yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   35:49
OK.
Mhm.

INT07   35:55
3.

Marta Basystiuk   35:55
OK. And I'm curious, we had some discussions with our with experts previously and they raised some concern about judicial independence and I will ask you specifically on the criminal justice system.
Since we are seeing some gradual improvements, especially our data sees the improvement in reduced government influence and public perception also reflects this growing belief in abundance of criminal justice system.
From your experience, do you agree? And if so, what do you think has driven this improvement?

INT07   36:37
So I mean when it come to independent of, I mean judicial independence probably focus on judges, we can talk later, but I mean justice system, there's also police and public prosecutor.
With police is difficult if the Prime Minister still sit at the head of the appointment, the police high-ranking police appointment committees. It's hard to remove politics from the the the police economy.
System and everything unless they change the appointing structures and process right but and as well as public prosecutors because the chief public prosecutor.
Have to be approved by the Senate and probably you already heard about it, but Thai Senate is not independent as well through the appointment process, you know.
So you've got the people at the very top who whose independents are being questioned. Meanwhile, for judges, the chief judges came from seniorities. I mean, like whoever is the most senior judges at that moment would be the chief of judges. So in Thailand, you know.
Judges know even from the moment they enter the judiciary, whether one day they could be the chief of judges or not. But I would say the problem of independent of judges come, I mean in the past.
OK, that's two things, the internal independence and external independence, right? So that's there's not a lot of pressures from external force to judges to our knowledge, but.
If you go outside Bangkok, if you go to like in a rural area, in reality, I mean by law they are independent. But in reality their social circle, especially outside Bangkok in rural area, they.
Stay be like police, have big prosecutor. They have like the social circle of that there's high-ranking authority in like at the provincial level. They went to golf together, they met at, you know, like party or something like that, so.
There's a number of time in which judges, high-ranking judges were seen with, you know, high-ranking police, high-ranking local politicians or something like that and sometime negatively impact.
Cases that they're working on that's that's more like external independent. But the biggest problem now is internal internal independence because under Thai law they.
Allow the senior judge to review the draft judgment of the junior judges. So that means the senior judge could decide the direction. I mean by law they can't. They can't say that.
OK, sorry.
So by law, the senior judge couldn't couldn't couldn't just make changes on the judgment directly, but they could just put the note on it and make recommendations and many time according to judges whom we talk with, especially the junior one.
They feel like they're under pressures to change the draft judgment to the way that senior recommended, not always the case. We saw some case in which student just read in the court that all my senior say that, but I'm not going to do it but.

Marta Basystiuk   40:47
Mhm.

INT07   40:47
Especially in 112 cases, several cases like that.

INT06   40:48
8.
Yeah, maybe I add a little bit of Kay because Kay already mentioned a lot. So that's why I think the the problem of the the independent of judges is come from the system of organization itself, everything if and as Kay mentions for the senior judges.

Marta Basystiuk   41:06
Mhm.

INT06   41:11
That and the one and especially in the Thai culture, if you agree or not agree, if you want feel OK, I disagree, but sometimes you have to agree because of the the seniority. So this is, I think this is.
That gay already flagged that, Yep.

Marta Basystiuk   41:31
That sounds perfect and thank you so much for clearing this out. And if I can follow up and ask you about the reforms or any specific initiatives that you would prioritize to strengthen independence and accountability, what would they be?

INT07   41:46
It's this one, the reviewing of draft judgment. Because I mean, if you want to say that judges are truly independence, they should also be independence from their boss, you know, or some internal force. And in the in Thailand there was one time in which constitution.

Marta Basystiuk   41:57
Yeah.

INT07   42:03
Prohibited judges to do this, to review draft judgment. They basically say, oh, I mean, it can't be reviewed by others. They use this constitution for like 4-5, I can't remember, just four or five years. And then that's military coup. And then once they draft a new constitution, they remove this because.
Because judges call for like they want to, I mean, especially senior judges, you know, they still want to have that power. And we talk with senior judges, they say, oh, it's because of the quality. But if you can't trust, can't trust your own people, you know, I mean, there's more questions about the training and capacity building, right?

INT06   42:41
Mhm.

INT07   42:41
It shouldn't be fixed through this way.

INT06   42:44
Yeah, and I also would like to add a little bit. You have no idea how, how the how the court is very, very conservative. Even new judges won't like to or would like to wear a skirt. This is very like, Oh my God, it's a hot debate among them already.

INT07   43:01
Wouldn't wouldn't like wanting to wear trousers, but even just that, you know, like the senior judge would be like, no, it's not good, but no one see. I mean, at the bench you couldn't see anything, you know? But yeah, women judges still not allowed to wear even pants or trousers.

INT06   43:03
Yeah, yeah.
See.
Yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   43:23
Gender equality. We are at 50 minutes and to be honest, I can continue this conversation for another hour at least, but I just wanted to check in very quickly and ask you if you have time for maybe one or two additional questions, or if not, it's totally fine and we will just wrap up the conversation.

INT06   43:41
Um, like for me, I have to go to the airport, but but maybe we should.

Marta Basystiuk   43:45
This is super important.

INT07   43:45
Yeah, I think I can. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I I can. I can answer. Yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   43:50
OK, then let's wrap up. I will. Perfect. Yeah. Thank you for saying.

INT06   43:51
Yeah. OK. So well, I'm OK. Maybe, maybe Kate can answer, right. And then I can leave. No. Yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   43:56
Yes, absolutely. Maybe I will ask a very general question. If there is anything you feel that should be that we should know about, but we haven't discussed it, can you please tell it, tell us what it is?

INT06   44:12
Hmm.

Marta Basystiuk   44:12
Maybe you saw any question that in the guiding list that you thought was very important and we haven't discussed it yet.

INT06   44:20
Maybe the corruption. The corruption. I'm not sure. Yeah, the corruption.

Ana Maria Montoya   44:25
It.

Marta Basystiuk   44:26
You mean corruption in the justice system or in general?

INT06   44:30
In general.

Marta Basystiuk   44:31
Mm-hmm.

Ana Maria Montoya   44:35
Yeah, the reason why we didn't ask is because it's actually was the the only factor that improved overall in in the world. So we were, yeah, very focused on on human rights, but but thank you, we will, we will keep it in mind.

INT06   44:35
Inseal a lot. Yeah, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   44:37
Thank you. And maybe.

INT06   44:53
Yeah, the corruption because now we have a case about a Social Security organization that like, yeah, it's a it's a they are they they use the budget is not in the proper way. That's why I think now the corruption even we have a we have.

Marta Basystiuk   44:53
Antique.

INT06   45:11
The, the, the deep core or the the the the root core of corruption a lot already. But now they just like come to bigger to come to like the the the big debate in in the Internet again. Yeah. About this. Yeah, practice.

Marta Basystiuk   45:24
And final question for you, my favorite one. I I I don't mean to put both of you on the spot, but if you can describe the situation of fundamental rights in Thailand in one sentence, what would it be?

INT06   45:39
OK, one sentence. Uh.

Marta Basystiuk   45:41
As of 2026.

INT06   45:42
OK.
Opened but limit.

Marta Basystiuk   45:50
OK, what about you? How would you describe it? Because we would like to use both of those quotes. If you don't mind, we can attribute your names or we can mention them as anonymous, but.

INT06   45:50
Yeah.

INT07   46:01
I yeah, I think it would be what I say. Like you not know whether it is the real freedom or not. Like one day in the future it could come after you.

INT06   46:14
Mm.

Marta Basystiuk   46:16
That sounds amazing and very close to what previous experts said actually. So thank you, you're all on the same page. I just want to greatly thank you again a lot and maybe I will leave it to Ana Maria and Santiago to mention how those will be used.



