INTERVIEW CODE 04


Marta Basystiuk   1:28
But since you've mentioned that you you are a scholar of competition law of regulatory in governance, I'd like to know how would you assess in general the status of fundamental rights in in Thailand and if you can think of any developments and it can be both or either.

INT05   1:30
Yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   1:47
Positive or negative that you believe are especially significant for us to know that are happening in practice. Please share with us as well.

INT05   1:56
I would say it the problem lies within the constitution or constitutions. In Thailand's case, we've had numerous constitution, but each and every one of them since the major one in the.
2540 hasn't done enough to guarantee human rights and fundamental freedoms at all, and they tend to keep on creating these new governmental, sorry, state institutions.
State organs that on the surface would seems like it all serve to reinforce the rule of law, so to speak. But if we delve into the result of those institutional organizations, we soon.
Realize that in fact they are there to kind of like a smoke smokescreen, so.
Bolt hope, so his feet.

Marta Basystiuk   2:56
So what I'm hearing is that on paper you do have some of the legal protections, but when it comes to proper implementation and enforcement, then that's when you can see some of the concerns.

INT05   3:10
For instance, though, the current constitution's objective when it was written was to eradicate. They actually use that word, eradicate corruption from Thailand.

Marta Basystiuk   3:14
OK.

INT05   3:26
And look where we are. We sit so far down on the corruption perception impact.

Marta Basystiuk   3:30
That's very interesting. OK, maybe then let's proceed with.
I'm sorry, I'm hearing something and I'm not sure whether it's just me or everyone hears that that noise.

Santiago Pardo   3:40
Sorry, yes.

INT05   3:43
Up.

Santiago Pardo   3:45
No, I think it's something with your microphone when you move. No, no, no, no with exactly. I think it's your microphone when you move like the the the cable.

Marta Basystiuk   3:48
With my microphone.

INT05   3:48
Oh.
Uh.
Ah, hold on. Uh, should I switch to the Bluetooth one? Give me one moment, please.

Marta Basystiuk   4:02
OK. Thank you. Thank you so much. Sorry for that. It's just I was not sure I was struggling a bit to catch everything, so.

Santiago Pardo   4:02
OK, OK.

INT05   4:17
All right, how's that?

Marta Basystiuk   4:19
Yeah, it's perfect. Santiago, can you hear it? Okay. So I'm looking at the the question there. Yeah.

INT05   4:25
Just give me one second, please.

Santiago Pardo   4:37
In the meantime, I will go for weather.

Marta Basystiuk   4:38
And I'm sorry for that. Yeah, just, yeah, absolutely. Take your time.
Oh, you're unmuted. Can you please unmute yourself?

INT05   4:53
Right. Better?

Marta Basystiuk   4:53
Perfect. I'm so sorry for that, but it was just a bit hard for me to catch everything.

INT05   4:56
No, no, no. It's not that. It's on my end. Thank you for letting me know if anything. And this is how you can tell that I am 8 millennial because we're not good with electronics.

Marta Basystiuk   5:01
Oh, absolutely.
Same. I'm very fascinated about digital transformation in general, but when it comes for me to use the technology, I rely on my colleagues to do it for me, which is embarrassing. Exactly, exactly.
I'd like to start, if you don't mind, with the civic participation and maybe transparency and then we can and you you can guide me actually to which particular part you'd like to dive in more. And if there is anything that is related to your expertise that is beyond the questionnaire, please let me know and we will discuss that.

INT05   5:25
OK.

Marta Basystiuk   5:42
I will ask questions with the our data and I'm very curious whether you agree or disagree and then I will ask you follow up questions on that. So when it comes to our first indicator civic participation that includes all the different components that I will ask you later about them.
Like freedom of expression, freedom of assembly and association. Like in general, when it comes to civic participation, we do see the overall decline over the last five years. And I was wondering whether you agree with this assessment. If yes, why? And then if not, if you have different experience, also please elaborate on.
on the reasons why you think that way.

INT05   6:25
Alright, yes, there is a decline. I do agree with that and it is disappointing because we are entering well, we were in an era of a on civil civilians government in contrast to.

Marta Basystiuk   6:38
Mhm.

INT05   6:40
A more military LED government. So I would say our hope was set a lot higher and yet even during civil civilian governments, we can see that a lot of activists are still being prosecuted under either directly under last match.

Marta Basystiuk   6:43
Mhm.
Mm.

INT05   7:00
Sorry, that's the gutter or other area other usage of slab strategic lawsuit against public participation. So from that point of view, there are a sharp rise in lawsuits and.

Marta Basystiuk   7:02
Mhm.
No, no, it's okay.
Mhm.

INT05   7:18
Prosecutions being prosecuted against activists and not just activists, though it even involves some scholars, some academics as well.

Marta Basystiuk   7:29
And can you be please be more specific as to maybe maybe you can provide some specific examples as to what constraints specifically on public debate for or on academic freedom in general affect the quality of policy making or?

INT05   7:44
Perfect.

Marta Basystiuk   7:49
Guilty reform or maybe competition enforcement from your experience or in general.

INT05   7:55
I think the well most highlighted example of for the past two weeks is that a lot of ex MPs like 40, it's either 42 or 44 of them are likely to be prosecuted for the fact that they propose a bill that would curb.
The enforcement of last Majesty law, and that is even beyond public debate, I would say at this, there is the reach of these prosecutions of these lawsuits are extremely grand.

Marta Basystiuk   8:18
Um.

INT05   8:31
And large, as far as public debate goes, I would say that these type of lawsuits work in that we haven't seen any big public debate touching on.
What we could be perceived as fragile, vulnerable topics in years.

Marta Basystiuk   8:54
And if I may ask you more about the last, I'm sorry if I'm pronouncing it incorrectly, last Majesty laws, I'm curious about the scope it covers because when you're saying that the bill was introduced, I'm just wondering whether you are having an issue of.
Specific matters or issues being discussed by the public? Or what specific questions are the ones that those in power would not want the general public to talk about or to debate on?

INT05   9:28
So I think it became very clear with that announcement, the governmental intention to prosecute, it became very clear that to touch, not even to delete, but to curb it just a little bit.

Marta Basystiuk   9:32
M.

INT05   9:45
Uh, the last magist, Masters State law means that we are in opposition of constitutional monarchy. Even though the action is being done within the parliament, that does not fall under parliamentary members immunities.
So it would the signal is the sign is that this discussion shall not be discussed even anywhere in the country. Really, there's no immunity for it.

Marta Basystiuk   10:18
And what do you think that this has? Do you think that it has the chilling effect on the rest of of the community, the fact that some people are being prosecuted for even?
Proposing and amendments to the law, do you think there is a chilling effect on in general in the community to stop participating in?
Policymaking process even through the channels that are.
Already established and available, so to speak.

INT05   10:51
I wouldn't go so far as to say that it on contribute to a shilling effect, but I would say that it's just once again another prime example for us that there's no that change cannot be made and at the moment what I've discovered with the younger generation.
Is that it's not that they don't care. It's not that they don't want to criticize. It's that they have come to realize that there's no point, that change is impossible. So there's a grand fatigue.

Marta Basystiuk   11:20
Mhm.
And can you please then tell us through which channels in general?
There are options for people to scrutinize the actions of governments of those in powers, and you can talk about the national or the local government, so it's up to you.

INT05   11:44
OK.
Um.
I'm in academia, so I am protected under the umbrella of academia, and I think a lot of the scholars, a lot of students do benefit from those as well. That being said, though, the loudest public participation is not done with them.

Marta Basystiuk   11:49
Mhm.
Mhm.
Mhm.
Mhm.

INT05   12:07
The umbrella of scholarly protection, but it's almost always on the outside. You combine that with the reality of the global and national economics at the moment in which we are.

Marta Basystiuk   12:10
Mhm.

INT05   12:23
Are what did the economists called us the ill man of Southeast Asia, which means that our economy isn't growing, it's lagging behind our neighbors. There is a matter inflation as well.

Marta Basystiuk   12:33
Mhm.

INT05   12:39
So combine that with the already the fatigue in speaking about change. I think people are not to say disinterest, but when there's no hope on the horizon, it tends to dissuade people from actively.

Marta Basystiuk   12:55
Mhm.

INT05   12:59
Anticipate actively calling out on a matter on issue at hand.

Marta Basystiuk   12:59
Mhm.
Mhm.
And in that respect, I'm thinking about the compliant mechanisms. And yesterday we had a conversation with one of the interviewees who who wanted me to specify what we mean under the the term. So I mean in general the institutional process through which people can actually report the grievances.
Or their dissatisfaction with some services with actions of public officials. Our data shows that there is a mixed performance when it comes to a complaint mechanism in Thailand. Um.
While we we see some improvements in non-governmental checks and you've just mentioned that in practice it's not that visible because there is this type of this, I don't want to call it disengagement, but the.
A lack of trust that the actions will lead to tangible results. So I'm just wondering from your perspective, how would you assess the complaint mechanism in in in Thailand right now if if you are, if you, if you feel comfortable to talk about it? Because if not, we will.

INT05   14:03
OK.

Marta Basystiuk   14:17
to freedom of expression.

INT05   14:19
I would say it depends on which court you're making complaints to. The administrative court has emerged as one of the more reliable mechanism here in the sense that they tend to hear every complaint and the delay.

Marta Basystiuk   14:23
Mhm.
Mhm.

INT05   14:38
For them to deliver justice isn't too long. They average about a year and a half to two years, so that's considered quite a fast justice being rendered. So that being said, though, it all depends on which organ you're making a complaint against.

Marta Basystiuk   14:47
Mhm.

INT05   14:57
If right, so for instance, for example, I believe the Election Commission of Thailand is looking at a few complaints within the administrative court.

Marta Basystiuk   14:58
And.

INT05   15:12
Yet I don't believe that those complaint would be met with a a sense of justice, a sense of satisfaction, satisfactory results at all. And then we have.
The Constitutional Court, which has proved time and again that they don't really work to protect the rights enshrined in the Constitution. They're not the guardian of the Constitution. Instead, they're being used as a political tool to curb, well, what?
Those what is viewed as dissents.

Marta Basystiuk   15:49
Mhm.
Super interesting and something that I forgot to point out. I know that I'm leading this conversation, but Santiago, please, at any point when you feel like I'm skipping some questions that are very important because he's leading the the assessment in general, I just want you to be comfortable with with him interrupting me and asking additional questions.
You've mentioned something very interesting for me that you are and all scholars in general, they are protected under the academics umbrella, so to speak. And I'm I'd like to ask you a question about our data on freedom of expression because we are seeing the gap.

INT05   16:27
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   16:28
We are seeing that our experts, they reported the decline when it comes to their perceptions regarding the freedom of opinion and expression and then the large majority of general population, they are actually seeing the improvement.
And I was wondering which side you're on and if you can help us with interpreting this divergence, like why do you think that there is this differences between the public, the general public's opinion and then experts opinion? We'd also appreciate that if you can comment on it.

INT05   17:03
Hmm. Truly told though, I don't. I'm trying to think whether there's a gap between the two.

Marta Basystiuk   17:12
Mhm.

INT05   17:13
There, because there are, uh, a number decline and I'm starting to think that maybe that's just the algorithm at work that make me not entirely see everything that's been going on because I do believe that, uh, scholarly works are still there.
Except they are a bit more. Um.
Measured in document. Sorry, I live in a cat's house and they're everywhere.

Marta Basystiuk   17:38
I love it. I love cats. I'm a cat person, so they will always make me smile. So to your point, would you say that for people from academia, there are no restrictions and no constraints when it comes to their ability to express themselves freely and without?
The fear of retaliation, even when it comes to some topics, OK.

INT05   17:59
Oh, I wouldn't go that far. I would simply say that we are a bit more measured in our vocabularies as opposed to one of those grand public standing, grand public debates. It's academic. So we are.

Marta Basystiuk   18:06
Oh.
Mhm.

INT05   18:15
A bit more cautionary that some would say that's like carbo dice in place, but you know, potato, potato. And I think it stems from the fact that we're being trained that way, especially in the case of Thailand, in which truth is not a defence for defamation lawsuit.

Marta Basystiuk   18:18
But fair enough.

INT05   18:36
And even though academic works fall under the exception for defamation lawsuit, it's how it's being interpreted by judges tend to differ, and that's no clear guideline.
Matter.

Marta Basystiuk   18:54
Interesting. And do you know if there are any groups in your opinion that are the most affected when it comes to any thoughts of possible restrictions on their ability to express themselves freely? I'm I'm.
Curious about maybe we can bring up some socio demographic factors like ethnicity, like nationality, religion.

INT05   19:11
Mm.

Marta Basystiuk   19:23
If you can comment on that.

INT05   19:23
I would say the those within the bracket of the the low income brackets are most vulnerable. That being said though with current social media assistant, how it functions, I'm sorry.

Marta Basystiuk   19:31
Mhm.

INT05   19:40
Is that if you can manage to put these cases under the scopic view of social media or any particular television programs if it receive a highlight attention of the public.
It would be somewhat protected as long as you can keep the attention of the public.
So, so to come back to answer, I would say the, um, less unfortunate in the economic bracket.
That being said, though, minority groups in Thailand tend not to speak up, so I would say that reinforce how unstable their legal status is in the country.

Marta Basystiuk   20:30
We also had some previous interviews with different representatives. I will not mention what they represent, but they pointed out on the fact that now social media is gaining, is becoming more and more popular, especially among younger generations.
And that there are some cases of monitoring that in their opinion, the surveillance and monitoring has increased as people moved to those digital spaces. What do you think about that? Do you think that?
You can say that there is a difference between expressing yourself, let's say on the streets or through established channels versus on the Internet. Have you seen that there there are different rules as to how you can do that?
Online versus.
In real life.

INT05   21:31
I don't think the rules have changed. It's the venue. So the younger generation has moved from walking down the streets to Twitter and Facebook. We still use Facebook over here, so they have moved to there. I haven't noticed any form of governmental.

Marta Basystiuk   21:36
Mm-hmm.
Same.

INT05   21:51
Monitoring. That being said, though, the private parties affected or being targeted by these social media movements.

Marta Basystiuk   21:52
Mm-hmm.

INT05   22:01
Tend to file a lawsuit. It's a slap and unfortunately under Thailand legal regime, foreign shopping is allowed. So even though the person being targeted works at have primary residence in Bangkok, they can file a lawsuit.

Marta Basystiuk   22:05
Mhm.

INT05   22:21
As far away as the northernmost province.
And that's.

Marta Basystiuk   22:27
OK.

INT05   22:30
I think in that case it tends to have a working chilling effect.

Marta Basystiuk   22:34
OK. And when we think about equality or equal treatment, I'm looking at the data and I'm also seeing that it shows deterioration in recent years.
So I was wondering whether you agree with this assessment and from your perspective, what factors do you think might explain what we are seeing?

INT05   23:01
Mm-hmm. I don't think we have a firm class ceiling in terms of equal between gender, yeah. But I have noticed for the past few years that there are few and fewer females in the.
Position of political power and I wonder whether it is being done consciously or is it?

Marta Basystiuk   23:20
Mhm.
Mhm.

INT05   23:30
That's one of those things that happened due to the fact that the political power tends to be concentrated to the personal connectivity.

Marta Basystiuk   23:43
Thank you for sharing this example. This is important.
I also like to ask, it's not something that I believe I included in the list of questions, but since you're working in the in the sector of.
Digital economy and Asian harmonization. I was really, I'd like to ask you a question about digital transformation. We know that now it's happening everywhere and I was wondering whether you think that the current efforts in digitalization.
Have actually strengthened, strengthened transparency and accountability in Thailand or do you think they created any barriers? And if you can think of any groups that are primarily disadvantaged by digital regulatory system, it's just a bit late, that's why.
I can't talk normally. Please share it with us.

INT05   24:43
I'm also very sorry for making you work so late and it.

Marta Basystiuk   24:48
No, no, no. It's our privilege. I'm very thankful that you are joining us.

INT05   24:52
I would say yes, digitalization of pretty much everything, and also especially through social media, has brought about a lot of transparency, which irritates governmental agencies to no end. Unfortunately, it doesn't bring about accountability.

Marta Basystiuk   24:54
Thank you.

INT05   25:10
With the state organs at all, it's just that people would know, people would notice. Giving the example of revelations, for instance, people do notice things because they've been the younger generation, they've been taking pictures, they do participate.
They do observe the election being done under that jurisdiction and then notice a stark differences.
Does the complaint about the differences in the the manner of the election being done in the counting of the votes? Does it translate to accountability of those in power, those organizing the election, especially the election committee? The answer is no.
So it's there's a stark difference that digitalization does bring about transparency, unwillingly, I might add, but or maybe because it's unwillingness, it doesn't bring about accountability at all. We notice corruption discrepancies being done.

Marta Basystiuk   25:59
No.
Mhm.
And then.

INT05   26:16
But it ends there.

Marta Basystiuk   26:21
Thank you. Would you mind if I move on to justice system or do you have any other preferences as to the we have 4 general buckets of rights, that's how we group them together. If you have any preferences, I can skip and.

INT05   26:37
OK.

Marta Basystiuk   26:41
Go to another category of rights or I can move.

INT05   26:45
That's fine. It's up to you. You're the one with the experience in conducting this interview.

Marta Basystiuk   26:50
Just want to make sure that you are comfortable with everything that we are asking you to to tell us. So if you don't mind, I will ask you about the justice system. We have a first question that compares, not compares, it's it's the wrong word.
When we are trying to look at the trends that are happening in both these systems, criminal and civil justice systems, we are seeing that there is a bit of, again, the divergent between the two.
We are seeing that with the criminal justice system, there were some improvements in in the elements that we are measuring at the same time when we look at the civil and administrative justice.
System, they are facing more challenges. So we are not saying that we are not putting them together, but just saying that the trend overall trend in criminal that it's slightly improving when civil including administrative justice system.

INT05   27:51
Yes.

Marta Basystiuk   27:56
Are not showing the same pattern. So again, I'm wondering whether this aligns with your perception if you can compare to or if you just want to focus on one of them, because that's because you probably worked with one more. I'm also wondering what you.
Perception as to the performance of this system right now in Thailand.

INT05   28:20
I am not sure whether there's improvement in terms of criminal jurisdictions.
It's been more or less the same in the sense that if it's a well known case that are uh under the media attention, under the attention of various Um international organizations or if those cases are being monitored by Um.
Faculty of law somewhere, then yes. So everything would go by the procedural law. So that would be no problem there. And another thing that we've come to notice is that for the past few years, criminal courts tend to allow.
Phones inside, as long as you don't take up calls, you can type, you can text that is being allowed, that is being permitted, which is quite a change I would say, whereas for civil jurisdiction.

Marta Basystiuk   29:10
1.
Mhm.

INT05   29:21
It's usually for the protection of the more economically advantage and I'm talking big firms, big companies or well connected companies here and.
This is me talking to my expertise. We can observe the fear of being bring about civil lawsuits. Even with the work, the decision of the Thailand's competition commissioned here, they tend to avoid.

Marta Basystiuk   29:40
M.

INT05   29:55
Mentioning the name of the company being investigated.
So we would see even in their decision against certain companies, they would use abbreviations like Company A, Company B without mentioning the whole name of the company itself, which to me points out to the fact that even the Competition Commission of Thailand.
Feared the power of these big companies. They feared being brought about in a civil lawsuit, likely for providing information that is that could be considered as trade secrets.
Which to me is we don't do that. It's a competition Commission. It's an antitrust issue and the public has the right to know the full name of the company being investigated, having the decision rendered against it. We don't see this anywhere else in the whole world.

Marta Basystiuk   30:40
OK.
Mhm.
Do you think there are risks in Thailand As for how to call it correctly, regulatory capture or concentration discretion?

INT05   31:05
That's the word, isn't it? Yes, we are prone to that.

Marta Basystiuk   31:10
Mm-hmm.

INT05   31:12
And it is by design, by the current constitution, that every newly created organization that is created for to better protect fundamental freedom and human rights and to.

Marta Basystiuk   31:17
Mhm.

INT05   31:32
Well, the organs that it's meant to monitor aren't doing their job and are the most prone to having inserts from private parties.

Marta Basystiuk   31:37
OK.

INT05   31:45
Once again, the example of the Competition Commission or the Antitrust Commission here, the board by the Constitution, sorry, the law states that the board of the Competition Commission must have two representative on the industry.

Marta Basystiuk   32:01
Mhm.

INT05   32:03
And the work of the board of the Competition Commission is to monitor competition in the market. And from that point on it, I believe that serve as a good example of the intention is good in the creation, but then it.

Marta Basystiuk   32:19
Mhm.

INT05   32:21
Falls behind in the enforcement in the institutional structure.

Marta Basystiuk   32:22
Mhm.
And what other institutional safeguards do you deem important to to prevent that?

INT05   32:34
Now, this is the point where my colleagues would call me naive. I still believe in the function of the Constitutional Court.
It's the work of the Constitutional Court to protect the Constitution, to be the guardian of the Constitution.
But it hasn't done that job in over a decade. I should update my patch, I think.

Marta Basystiuk   32:58
And do you think that there are any, you mentioned in the beginning that there is status quo on amending less majesty, I'm sorry for pronouncing it incorrectly, incorrectly laws. Do you think there is also this?

INT05   33:07
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   33:15
Restriction to improve the work, the operational, the functioning of the court in general.

INT05   33:26
Hmm.
To be honest, I'm unsure about the transparency of the courts. It's quite opaque. I remember taking students to observe the proceeding of one of the.

Marta Basystiuk   33:30
M.

INT05   33:44
Gosh, one of the Criminal Court against other students of the fact of Chiang Mai University and.
The decision being rendered was rendered by a Commission of judges who aren't sitting judges of the case, and I find that odd.
Then nobody understood who are these committee of judges.

Marta Basystiuk   34:14
I'm just trying to wrap my head around the the phrase who are not sitting judges. No, it's it's very important because I'm actually wanted to ask you about we've been having.

INT05   34:18
Sorry, it's it's it's it's me. I'm I'm not phrasing it correctly.

Marta Basystiuk   34:31
Some conversations as well and some of the experts they are pointing out when it comes to the justice system that.
It's in. In some cases, some concerns have been raised as to the independence and impartiality of courts and justice institutions in general, and something that you are mentioning is actually a great example of.
Of this, it explains better this concern. That's why I got so interested. And you basically replied to something that I was intended to ask you. So I don't know whether you'd like to elaborate more, but if not, it's already a good example.

INT05   35:11
It's a lot of confusion that the city judges.

Marta Basystiuk   35:14
Mhm.

INT05   35:17
Aren't really the one rendering the decision.
It's the decision. The result comes from somewhere under the guise of the committee of judges.
And they felt comfortable enough to announce that inside the card room.

Marta Basystiuk   35:36
And do you think that those cases pertain specifically to economic or regulatory cases or in general for all the cases that are coming their way?

INT05   35:48
I've only seen it. Well, I've only observed it once and seen it another time in one of those report my wonder NGO and in both cases they all involve a political cases.

Marta Basystiuk   36:06
OK. Thank you. This is very important to understand. Um, absolutely.

Santiago Pardo   36:10
I have a question there. Do you think that there this problem of the independence and impartiality in the in the civil justice mainly, do you think that there is some?
How to say like institutional problem like that that cannot be uphold or defend like the course to these things or or is a matter of?
Of power and pressure.
I You know what I mean.

INT05   36:46
I think it's worse. I think it's cultural. Like we're Thai, we're stereotypical Asian in the fact that we are taught to respect our elders, our seniors. So likely I imagine the concept of someone.

Santiago Pardo   36:50
OK.

INT05   37:04
Being behind the judgment is OK ish in the mind of these judges is acceptable for them because it's they're culturally brought about under this type of atmosphere. So it's not.
Against their nature and they don't particularly view it as impact impacting their impartiality.

Marta Basystiuk   37:32
Interesting. I like a lot that you referred to the notion of cultural intrinsic characteristic because one of our interviewees, he also pointed out that in Thailand, Thailand is very relationships based and that's.

INT05   37:43
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   37:52
Something that really stuck with me. I feel like it's a great connotation. I would take it as a definitely as a positive thing. But when it comes to independence, ensuring independence, fairness and impartiality, there is a very thin line between.

INT05   38:00
Mm.

Marta Basystiuk   38:10
Having those close relationships and then ensuring that those safeguards are intact. So thank you for pointing this out. I'm sorry, Santiago, I I interrupted you. Please go ahead.

INT05   38:18
Mhm.

Santiago Pardo   38:26
No, no. Same as you, Marta. For me, this is a really interesting answer. I'm from Colombia and and I kind of understand what you mean. I am actually. I'm really impressed how the.
How the the way that you describe and and other experts describe the culture in these things in in Thailand is very similar to the Colombian one is is insane is very very similar so.
I cannot understand.
These dynamic that you mentioned.

INT05   39:02
I prefer her like culturally, usually globally the pronouns used would be he or she, right? Whereas in Thailand it's Big Brother, younger brother, big sister, younger sister, aunt. Although I might get killed if I called a colleague in my work as aunt because that's like the limit is big sister.

Marta Basystiuk   39:09
Mhm.
Oh, wow.

Santiago Pardo   39:14
Mm-hmm.

INT05   39:21
Easter.

Santiago Pardo   39:22
OK.

INT05   39:23
As a pronoun. So you can imagine in a Justice Department where there is a Big Brother using a pronoun as a Big Brother and little sister there. So the like you mentioned, the relationship, the seniority is at play here.

Marta Basystiuk   39:25
It's very mindful.
Mm.

INT05   39:42
And I would assume it impact the impartiality of judges whether they would recognize it or not.

Marta Basystiuk   39:43
umm
Yeah, I fully agree. And we had this conversation and I brought nepotism as a form of corruption that I'm very there is a very thin line between nepotism, favoritism and and understanding that it's like cultural factor that just embedded in in.

INT05   40:01
Yeah.
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   40:10
In the system and how it operates, and I think it's crucial to understand. OK, so let's then proceed. I have a few more questions if you don't mind, unless you'd like to diverge and dive into questions on top of my head on labour on.
Property. Just let me know. We will stop and move on.

INT05   40:30
I'm afraid I don't really have much knowledge about labor law in this case. I haven't been following any labor cases, so.

Marta Basystiuk   40:38
OK, perfect. Then we won't discuss any of of it. That's perfect. Just, yeah, let me know whenever something doesn't work. I'm also looking at our data. Let me bring it back. And if possible, are you comfortable with answering some specific question on a civil or criminal justice system?

INT05   40:58
Yes, I think so, yes.

Marta Basystiuk   41:01
On both. OK, sounds great. So when it comes to civil justice system, we are seeing that there is uneven enforcement of judgment that most respondents highlighted uneven enforcement of judgments as the key concern.
And I was wondering whether you've how would you assess first and foremost overall efficiency and quality of civil justice system and would you agree that this is like one of the key problems in addition to of course delays, I would say timeliness is a forever problem in all of the.

INT05   41:20
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   41:39
In the countries I don't even consider at this point it as a problem because everyone is struggling with that. But if you can comment on the efficiency and and quality and if there is anything that you'd like us to pay attention to, either something that it stands out in a good way or.
Um, something that lacks that makes the system lag behind and needs to be improved.

INT05   42:05
I would say in the execution of the judgments, the enforceable judgments, especially if judge are ordered some type of financial monetary remedies and.
It can only be executed. It is not can only be, but it's usually executed against a a person, an individual person, and it's can rarely be executed against a company because companies tend to be tend to be more knowledgeable about the law.
And they tend to know to speak frankly, know how to hide the money very well. For instance, the law only obligate state banks to cooperate with judgments.
So there are a few banks, a few private banks that aren't under the obligation to talk about the informations of the client, not even to acknowledge having client under a certain name.

Marta Basystiuk   42:58
Mhm.

INT05   43:13
So from that point, I would say that judgments tend to not be executed.

Marta Basystiuk   43:21
And what type of measures, institutional procedurals that you deem important to improve the situation? What would you say that needs to be done in that respect?

INT05   43:32
Gosh, at this stage, I don't think there's anything that could help. I would say maybe the law could facilitate by working on the obligation for all the banks and all the financial institutions to cooperate, but I think it's.

Marta Basystiuk   43:36
Oh.
Mhm.

INT05   43:47
The problem, it's a bit more grounded than that. I would say that all of the parties involved, all the institutions involved, aren't cooperating at all.
Not even the tax Bureau, I would say.

Marta Basystiuk   44:06
OK.

INT05   44:07
So that's yeah, I don't see a way out at all. The problem is too intertwined to be resolved with a few laws or regulations.

Marta Basystiuk   44:19
Thank you. And what do you think about accessibility? I mean, how accessible, in your opinion, is civil justice system for ordinary people in general, maybe in terms of cost or access to legal aid?
Or any other element that comes to your mind.

INT05   44:39
Access to legal aid is available to everyone. It's the quality and the frequency. The efficiency is at stake here. I've heard a few complaints about legal aid lawyers who aren't.

Marta Basystiuk   44:44
Mhm.
Mm.

INT05   44:55
Very knowledgeable or efficient. For instance, they would, um, take on cases with no follow up and just show up like they didn't do their homework and just show up on the day of the court.
However, there is this new system for the past years called an E filing, which helps the consumers to file their complaint against sellers on the electronic commerce.
Venue. However, I've heard a counter argument against the E filing because how it collects the files is very poorly done. For instance, they would ask for proof which will be submitted.
To the E filing system, either in a JPEG format, in a picture format or PDF format, but when these proof are being transferred.
To uh, gosh, what's the word here? It's not just you now. Uh, to the counterparty, to the defense. Sorry, it's done in a format that is pretty near illegible. You can't zoom in, you can't really say. You can't really see what the proof said.

Marta Basystiuk   46:14
Mhm.

INT05   46:16
So the E filing facilitate access to justice, but at the same time it doesn't really guaranteed equal justice for both parties of the lawsuit of the case here.

Marta Basystiuk   46:23
Mhm.
Very important.
Yeah, on the surface, like we always need to look at the problem in a holistic way, not just from one side, but actually see whether there is any negative consequences when it comes to other elements. So thank you for sharing that and if I can turn to criminal justice.

INT05   46:35
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   46:48
I'm again looking at our data and what I'm seeing, yeah.

Santiago Pardo   46:50
Actually I I have a question there Marta, because you already mentioned many of the problems that are in the in the civil justice, one of the main or maybe the the the most.
Problematic according to our data is they do process in administrative proceedings and you already mentioned a lot of examples of of processing in in of issues in these processes, but if we model like the the civil justice in in in the different stages.
Where do you think that is the most problematic?
A stage in the in the in the civil justice or or in which or which suffer most more the the non respect of these proceedings.

INT05   47:47
I am inclined to say every step of the way, but that's too much. That's hyperpolic, I would say. Well, taking an example of e-filing, it is very clear that the problem is embedded within the system itself in that it's not created with a.

Marta Basystiuk   47:56
OK.

INT05   48:07
To borrow your word, a holistic view with concern about the whole ecosystem. So the problem lies in the system and it's kind of is a reflection of Thailand as a whole with regard to how we present ourselves really well also on the surface concept of the E filing.
System is great, but when it comes to the functioning of it and.
Tends to lag behind. It tends to not live up to the hope. And of course, the system doesn't just happen in the void. There are people behind it that contributes to the system being the way it is.
Not just the person that are task that are actually being given money to create the system, but also all the collegiate of the Justice Department who are involved with signing off with the approval of this.
Odak as well.
So the whole system.

Marta Basystiuk   49:14
So what I'm hearing is that the outcomes in both the civil and administrative disputes, they they are not predictable and what you are saying that drive this unpredictability is actually at all of the unfortunately all of the stages of of the.
Case of judication. Am I hearing that correctly?

INT05   49:35
Alright.
Yes. That being said though, my colleague would argue that we are a civil law legal system. So for judgments to differ from one another, that is by design to which I would argue that they have to be some guidelines, especially guidelines being rendered by.

Marta Basystiuk   49:38
M.
Mhm.

INT05   49:57
Courts of higher status.
So that's the justification being currently used towards the uncertainty of judgments here. And when we talk about uncertainty of judgments, I think it goes both ways in both civil and criminal cases.

Marta Basystiuk   50:05
OK.

INT05   50:15
Although with criminal cases lately with cases on against.
How should I say against, uh, gosh, public speakers, uh, politically motivated cases. We have noticed that the sanctions is getting harsher and harsher and one of the reason.

Marta Basystiuk   50:27
Mhm.

INT05   50:38
Might be that these cases are no longer in the news, are no longer receiving public recognition, public attention enough.
So judges tend to apply the sanction a bit more freely.

Marta Basystiuk   50:55
Mhm.
I'm looking. We are almost at one hour and I I'm very cautious. It's it's a it's a pleasure to be honest. I didn't even feel that this conversation that one hour has already passed. So I'm I feel like you are you are so wonderful and I can't.

INT05   51:02
And it's 10:00 PM where you are. I'm so sorry. It shouldn't be though, I think.

Marta Basystiuk   51:16
Thank you enough for all of the information that you provided. I just want to be very mindful of your time because we do appreciate that you are doing that using your own time. I have two final questions, unless Santiago, you you'd like to ask something more specific about criminal justice.
You're like on the fence. You're like, yes, I do, but I also want to be mindful of the time.

INT05   51:43
It's OK. I don't have anything scheduled after this.

Santiago Pardo   51:43
Yes.

Marta Basystiuk   51:45
Oh, really? Can we ask one more? OK, Santiago, do you have any prepared question on criminal justice?

INT05   51:48
Of course.

Santiago Pardo   51:54
Is is about the discrimination in the criminal justice. Do you think that there is some socio demographic group that is more?
Like or affected in inside the justice, not only in the criminal, in the C of justice as well.

Marta Basystiuk   52:07
Affected.

INT05   52:16
Of course, if we're step away from politically motivated cases, we have noticed that drug related cases, those being sanctioned tend to be female.

Marta Basystiuk   52:27
Mhm.
Interesting.

INT05   52:35
And it's usually female of less financially fortunate.

Marta Basystiuk   52:41
Mhm.
Population.
Thank you. Thank you for drawing our attention to that. We are also trying to have our interviews from people across the country so that we have a better understanding of how they perceive some of our survey data points. So it's important to know that.

INT05   53:02
OK.

Marta Basystiuk   53:03
You are bringing our attention to that. So then I'll come to an end to to close. I have two more general questions. The first I'd like to know is there anything else that you'd like to share with us that we didn't cover but you didn't very important for us to know maybe something.
from your work, from your expertise.

INT05   53:27
Right. This is me being a bad student and not understanding the younger, younger generation. I believe judges are too young in my country, so they lack outside experience, like they know the law and they tend to apply the law harshly, like they stick to the letter of the law.

Marta Basystiuk   53:40
Yeah.
Mhm.

INT05   53:45
And buy um.
Bypassing the spirits of the law.

Marta Basystiuk   53:51
And you don't have any specific. So if for instance in Europe you have two years and there is no.

INT05   53:56
Two years.
Two years of working experience and it's working like they not. They don't have to submit proof of actual work, they can just say they are a legal assistant somewhere and have someone signing off.
The paperwork.

Marta Basystiuk   54:14
And then they are eligible to become a judge.

INT05   54:17
Yes.

Marta Basystiuk   54:19
Okay. Thank you.

INT05   54:20
And the judge traineeship is short of only one year, so I believe it's too short.

Marta Basystiuk   54:27
Mhm.
And this is for both criminal and civil. And I know that you have at least, OK.

INT05   54:31
Yes, there's no difference.

Marta Basystiuk   54:36
That's new, at least for me.

INT05   54:37
Mm-hmm.

Marta Basystiuk   54:40
So thank you so much. And then the final question, my favorite one, and some interviews were not happy about it because I don't want to put anyone on the spot, but I will now. And if you can please summarize the status of the fundamental rights in Thailand in 2025 in one sentence, what would it be?
Can be one phrase if it's easier.

INT05   55:02
Dissatisfactory like for once we coming off of the junta ruled government or we had a civilian LED government. So our hopes are high in terms of protection of rights and freedoms.

Marta Basystiuk   55:05
Even one word.

INT05   55:21
And it's.
Seems to be not that much difference. If anything, slap lawsuits in civil jurisdiction are on the rise, so in a way it has produced.
Chilling effect. Let's go with that. That is concerning to me.

Marta Basystiuk   55:45
Thank you so very much and I will let Santiago to tell us two sentences about the the work that he's leading.

Santiago Pardo   55:58
You know, I I want to to thank you as well because this conversation is is very useful. Basically the idea of these interviews is to collect different perspectives and views about the.
Not only the human rights, also about the the the judicial system in Thailand and your perspective has been really valuable because you are an academic and and your experience as well as has is.
It's very granular to understand some details on the processes and basically the idea with these interviews is to create a new chapter in the report that we share with you to show all the nuances.

INT05   56:45
Mhm.

Santiago Pardo   56:48
That this indicator indicators have maybe we can show that something is improving, but we want also to highlight the challenges for that indicator or for or for that dimension of the of the justice system, so.
This is this is great and we will share with you the report once it's finished for sure that all the views of you experts will be in the in the final insight so.
Thank you very much for for participating on this and I I really want to to keep in touch for future projects. So thank you. It's it's great to have these conversations.

Marta Basystiuk   57:35
Yeah, I'll just second. Yes, thank you so very much. We really appreciated your experience first and foremost and then the kind of how well versed you are in what you do. So it's a privilege for us to have this conversation and if you have any questions or if you we understand that this.

INT05   57:35
Of course, it's been fun for me as well.

Marta Basystiuk   57:54
This might be a sensitive topic in Thailand, so if you change your mind as to being acknowledged, just reach out and let us know. And if you have any questions, any follow-up questions about this particular project or in general about World Justice Project, just also reach out to us. We will be happy to provide any information you will need.
It's been a pleasure and enjoy your day. Have a great one.

INT05   58:14
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Have a good evening. Oh, more like have a good night in your case.

Marta Basystiuk   58:21
Thank you. Thank you. I appreciate that too. OK. OK. Bye.

INT05   58:25
All right then. Goodbye.

