INT3


Marta Basystiuk   0:29
Thank you so much for sharing that. This is excellent. But before I dive into the questions that relate to first labor and then to justice or litigation, may I ask you a broad question? From your perspective as a dispute and employment lawyer, how would you assess the current state of human rights entirely?
And maybe if you would like to point out on a couple of developments either in a one year or two years or five years that you feel are the most important for us to know that somehow affect the status of human rights, please do share with us.

INT04   1:09
No multiple choices for me, right?
OK, for human right in Thailand, I don't see thing that change domestically for the past year and overall I think it.
Getting improved in term of like the legal proceedings, nothing much different from past year.

Marta Basystiuk   1:37
And what about the five year term? Because some of our data, it showcases the trend over the last five year years. Would you say that you are seeing some differences and EPS which wants improvement or decline?
Like in general.

INT04   1:53
In general I would say it improving but not domestically improved and there is nothing despite up to see something was noticed.

Marta Basystiuk   2:06
OK, perfect. So are you comfortable with me then starting with the questions related to labour first, labour rights? OK, so I'm looking at our data and I will post the question referencing our data.

INT04   2:13
Yes.

Marta Basystiuk   2:22
It suggests that Thailand's performance on labour rights has declined since 2020. At the same time, when we look specifically at the survey from the general population, we are seeing that a large majority of workers are saying that they are free to form unions, that they are free to negotiate with.
Employers and other benefits. From your experience, what is the current reality of labour rights in practice and what developments do you think explain the situation in Thailand?

INT04   2:55
If we have the labor law, we have the labor union law, everything.
I view that because the economy downturn, the labor union and the employee lose their marketing power because in the past when economy is good, the employer will have a lot of like.
Order from from their customer. Therefore the labor union can demand for for higher salary or higher bonus and the employer will will limit them because of the good economies.
But right now, the community trend is not good. The employer doesn't have much demand. Therefore, when the labor union submit the labor demand, they don't have that.
Much marketing power, but that is because of economy, not because of the law, not because of the employer want to suppress the employee at all. It's just normal economy.

Marta Basystiuk   4:08
Mhm.
And in your experience, where do you think are the most persistent challenges still remain? I mean working conditions, wages, some of our previous experts, they were alluding to different types of discrimination or exploitation when it comes to.
Foreign workers, are there also any specific sectors that you think those issues are more acute or seen?

INT04   4:44
Hmm.
I would say we the labour situation in Thailand is more developing and already some is mature if compared to 20 years ago when the factory at that time is still at.
At that period of time, there's a lot of issue on the working conditions, but right now when the country develop, develop and we have money to invest and to increase the working condition.
I would say that the working condition is up to the standard and.
For the for the discrimination or something against the female employee, I think we improve a lot. We and for the we, I I feel that there's a movement on the.
On.
Not discriminate against sexual agenda and Thailand is really diversity country and and the right of LGBTQ is getting improved. So in those sense of the diversity or the gender discrimination, I don't see things like that.
You may have some question on the foreign worker, but we need to separate those type of expat for the executive expat the high level. I think they have really their right on the working unit is very good.

Marta Basystiuk   6:23
Mm.

INT04   6:30
But for the the worker like the one in the factory that one we have some standard and they got up to the standard for sure that there there is some question or some discussion from those group that want to be a part.
Of labor union because now in in Thailand they cannot be a part of labor union. That may be the movement.

Marta Basystiuk   6:55
OK.
Yes. OK. So in addition to, let's say, foreign or migrant workers, do you see any other?
Groups of people, let's say informal workers who don't have some documents or maybe from rural communities or minority representatives, do you think they?
Have the same legal protections as overall citizens in across the country? Or do you think they also experience some type of constraints like they can't join the labor union?
Or you can say that there is no disparity. I'm not trying to. Yeah, it's.

INT04   7:41
OK, we need to.
OK, we we need to, we need to to to classify them.

Marta Basystiuk   7:50
I'm just trying to understand, yeah, I'm sorry if I interrupted. I'm just trying to understand who is the most exposed in addition to potentially foreign workers, if any.

INT04   8:01
OK, for the foreign worker, OK, number one for the group of the executive worker or executive expat coming to work here with the.

Marta Basystiuk   8:13
Mhm.

INT04   8:18
But there's no company. Everything is conform with the law for sure, and they may have.
Very good working conditions. That is for the first group. The second group is to have expat who come here illegally but in the not in the factory, for example Filipino.
Who comes to work in the restaurant? Sometimes they don't have work permit or they do. They're not like work. They don't apply for work permit. This group I would say.
There is still illegal, but the working condition is not that bad. The reason is because of the economy. They work in the industry that high pay if then higher pay than standard.
Because they are the and they can speak English. So this group I don't think that working condition is bad because their own supply and demand for the third group is the worker in.
Faculty such as the Myanmar people or Cambodian people who come to work legally, those have need to, those need to register with the Ministry of Labor.
And they can have, uh, the working condition.
At the minimum, as the law provided, and then we have the fourth group, the one who along the border, some may have, some may come here illegally, those.
Those work in the.
Economy or the industry that doesn't provide good standards. So this group may have may not get the working condition as the law provided.

Marta Basystiuk   10:31
Perfect. That's excellent. Thank you so much. Then you mentioned a couple of times about the unions that in general, most people in Thailand, they can enjoy this right very freely and they can form unions. They can also bargain collectively.
With their employers, do you have you in your practice? I'm wondering as a practicing lawyer, have you seen any cases when workers would not organize or use the fact that they are in those unions because of the fear of retaliation?
Have you observed any pressure points that tend to arise?

INT04   11:17
Can I try to because when we say thing we need to divide the the type of the population we talking about. When I work here my client employer from the.
From the like multinational company so they apply the they quite comply with the law and this group is the one that I negotiate with the labour union on for the employer side.

Marta Basystiuk   11:42
M.

INT04   11:55
I don't see them. I don't see them afraid or be afraid of anything that the employer would do. In contrast, I feel that they abuse the power.
They abuse the law, try to provoke the employer that from the that for the worker in the multi multinational company.

Marta Basystiuk   12:10
Interesting.

INT04   12:21
But for the worker in local company, there might be a chance that they are afraid of the of the action from the employer.

Marta Basystiuk   12:35
Thank you so much for maybe just to develop in in that route and I'm very interested to hear more about the remedies you mentioned that. So I'm I'm interested if any disputes, labor disputes take place, how effective do you think?

INT04   12:51
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   12:54
Are the main mechanisms and which are those mechanisms? Are those the administrative bodies? Or because you've mentioned that you have a separate labor court, people or workers would usually resort straight away and they would go to the court. Maybe they would.
Resort to mediation. So again, what do you think? How effective are those mechanisms and what are those mechanisms? What are the most effective of those three in Thailand?

INT04   13:25
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   13:25
Maybe there are more.

INT04   13:26
I I I try to say, I try to structure the the answer for you because it's depend on the type of labor cases. Doesn't mean that.

Marta Basystiuk   13:37
Mhm.

INT04   13:41
One type, one particular type can go to the the five body that provide to them. So I try to structure. OK, let's start from.
Let's start for.
OK, we have labour protection law and if the employee have a problem with the employer on the obligation or the right under the labour protection law.
They can go to to agency.
The first agency is the Ministry of Labor or the Department of Labor Protection.
To.
To file the complaint with the labour inspector for their right under the labour protection law, that is the first agency or they can go to the labour court directly.
For the for the right under the Labour Protection Law, that is the first Labour case. The second Labour, the second Labour case is under the Labour Union Act.

Marta Basystiuk   15:04
Mhm.

INT04   15:04
Such as the the came on something against the labor union for this for for this right they can they have to go to the.
LRCLS Labor Relation Committee first.
And then appeal to the labor court.
And then if the labour case is under other labour law, such as the claim for unfair termination compensation, they need to go directly to the labour court.
And then the 4th type is because when the employee violate the labour protection law, sometime it is criminal offence. They can also find the criminal case with the police officer or the.
To keep in the court directly.

Marta Basystiuk   16:14
And would you consider all of those mechanisms as effective, or would you say that some are more effective than others? I'm not trying to say that courts are, but that's what I assume.

INT04   16:28
It effective because the way that we we have several agency it is because if the case go to the labor, if everything go to the labor court.
For sure the the case will fright the card and the card cannot function as it must be. That's why they have the that's why the legal system established other agency body to to help resolve the case.

Marta Basystiuk   16:59
And I'm trying to, I do have a question about labor, but I also think it's a great moment for me to follow on justice system since we started talking about the court. But one last question about the labor rights because since you are.
Practicing that on the daily basis, I was wondering what are the priority areas that you believe could strengthen, if necessary at all, labor rights and decent work in Thailand over the next year?
If you see any area that needs to be improved, what is that area that you would say that needs improvement?
Maybe you know about any specific reforms or initiatives or.

INT04   17:46
Yeah, yeah. I'm thinking.

Marta Basystiuk   17:49
OK, I'll give you a minute.

INT04   17:51
Mm.
Mm.
OK, for because I'm on the I'm normally on the employer side. From my experience, I see that labor union is the party who abuse.
The system.
They try to provoke the employer in order to gain the bargaining power and sometimes they find the nonsense.
Criminal case against the employer in order to put pressure on the director of the company and the mechanism for.
From the ecosystem is try to support them. That's why.
It's cost burden sum on the employer. I'm talking for the the multinational company who like compile with the law and got the got this kind of labor unions.

Marta Basystiuk   19:04
Next.

INT04   19:08
This should be improved and because if the case, if the legal system continue thing like this, the economy or the attention of the Thai company will getting.
Worth.
This is for the for the operation where the labor union abuse the law.

Marta Basystiuk   19:33
Can you be more specific and maybe provide us an example that we can use how they put pressure on a company? In what ways?

INT04   19:34
Yeah.
OK, for example, when the labor union submit the labor demand and then they have to negotiate.
And the labour, the labour union of of course use the traffic of delay no overtime in order to gain the marketing power. That is no normal way of the of labour union to gain marketing power we understand but they start.
To file the criminal action against the director on anything that they can file. For example, we have a really old law stating that the employer need to set.
A meeting with the labour union committee every three months and it because it is quite old law then if the law said if the employer doesn't.
That that kind of meeting with the employee is sometimes is the variation of the labour law, labour protection law and it is a criminal offence. It's very old law. Then the employer employee filed that that loophole and filed the criminal prosecution again.
The director of the company. So we will I to me a view that it it is nonsense cases and try to a view what the the legal framework.

Marta Basystiuk   21:24
And they are pretty prevalent from what I understand. It's not just one one case. OK, thank you. So I will suggest to move on to the justice and I'd like to double check with you what?

INT04   21:29
Yes, yes.

Marta Basystiuk   21:41
System you you'd like to discuss. Are you comfortable with me posing a question about both criminal and civil or just civil? Yep. OK, so our data shows that safeguards seem to be more stronger in criminal justice system.

INT04   21:48
Please, please do.

Marta Basystiuk   21:58
While performance in civil justice system, including administrative, is weaker. And I'm wondering, do you agree? Does this reflect your experience as a litigator? And in your view, what might explain this gap?

INT04   22:16
Can you please elaborate more when you mentioned about safeguard? What do you, what do you mean by that?

Marta Basystiuk   22:23
OK, so safeguards can all the measures that ensure fairness, that ensure independence due process within each of the system. So when for instance we think about.
When we think about the civil.
Civil justice. We think about equal opportunity to present evidence or the right to legal representation, access to appeal, enforceability of judgments, transparent procedures.
Whereas when we think about criminal justice system, it can be from the presumption of innocence to right to also legal counsel, to right to remain silent, to right to appeal, to right to a fair trial before an independent court. So we basically have an aggregated.
Indicator or factor based on all of those aspects that relate to separately criminal and then civil justice systems and overall we are seeing that criminal justice system is improving.
When it comes to legal protections and unfortunately, civil justice system is not showing the same positive trend. If I'm saying something incorrectly, Santiago is here to make sure that I'm using the right data because it's a bit late and I might.
So please go ahead. But yes, in general, what is your perception when it comes to both of those systems? Would you agree that civil justice is lagging behind a bit while criminal justice system is improving or would you say?

INT04   23:54
See understand.

Marta Basystiuk   24:10
Something else that it's vice versa or if you feel like you can only comment on civil or criminal, please do and tell us what you think about its overall performance in the last year or.

INT04   24:23
Yeah, I yeah, I I try to think because we cannot compare the criminal and civil to in my idea in the same fashion as you mentioned. The reason is that they both have the criminal law and civil law have different concepts and.

Marta Basystiuk   24:42
Mhm.

INT04   24:43
They have a different remedy.
One particular thing may cannot be both review and criminal. One some cases can be both review and criminal. Some cannot be both and.
It also depend on the system and the.
And the lawyer you use. So I try to explain to you, for example, if you go to for the criminal, you want you need the case need to be the thing that.
Is criminal offence and if you go to the route in Thailand because for to find the criminal offence in Thailand you can do two things. One is go to the public prosecutor, police officer, public prosecutor at the court. The second thing is you hire a lawyer and and do the private.
Criminal prosecution if you go to the root of the.
The.
Police and then public prosecutor for sure it is less efficient than hire a private lawyer to do.
If compared with the, yes, if compared with the civil case.

Marta Basystiuk   26:13
So.
I'm sorry, my interrupting.

INT04   26:22
You need to hire a private lawyer to start the civil proceeding and also it depend on the quality of of the lawyer you hire.
And come with the price.
Oh, below your *** bail.
If you got a good quality lawyer, the case can be effective that more effective than low quality lawyer. That is normal thing in the in in this type of system.
So that's why when you compare that the criminal.
Proceedings provide more safeguard or more effective than civil proceeding. I try to. I feel that it is really difficult to compare both things.

Marta Basystiuk   27:21
Yeah, I'm sorry, it's my mistake. I was not meant to. I didn't explain it right. I was not comparing comparing to the justice system. I was just saying that we, according to our survey data, we are seeing that criminal justice system overall is seeing improvements in some of the indicators that we are measuring.

INT04   27:29
Mm.

Marta Basystiuk   27:39
At the same time, we are not seeing the same trend when we are looking at the civil justice system. So we are not comparing them side by side, but we are just saying that this one is improving while that one is at the same level.

INT04   27:48
Oh, OK.

Marta Basystiuk   27:55
Yeah, because when you look at the scores, you will see that civil justice system has higher scores. So it's just I'm talking about the developments in general. Maybe I will start with more general question about the independence and impartiality because we had.

INT04   28:00
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   28:10
A couple of interviews with other experts who pointed out to to some of the concerns. In your opinion, to what extent do you think that the courts and justice institutions operate independently and freely from any pressure?

INT04   28:13
Yes.
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   28:30
It can be political, it can be institutional. And where do you see risks to impartiality in practice?

INT04   28:34
OK.
I I I think the card have a very independent of.

Marta Basystiuk   28:40
If you see it.

INT04   28:52
I don't think there will be OK for the labor court, for the labor court. I think that it's act really independently. No one can put.
Pitcher or the labor card. The reason is that the disputed amount in the labor card is quite low and no one gonna buy the cash for the labor case.
For the criminal court and the civil court, we got some rumor that there might be some influence or bribe, but we don't see.
The evidence and also another another part is we view that the the legal system or the court system itself try to clear themselves. We saw the news that that expel some.
Just even the very high length from during the year. So I would say that the court that that for sure there is some rumor there might be some evidence and we see the result that the just.
The the system, uh, try to kill itself.

Marta Basystiuk   30:26
Thank you. And then I I was wondering, so I'm very interested in digital transformations that different state institutions are now undertaking. And justice, of course, is not an exception.
And I'm wondering, I just have a quick question about the digital tools. If there are any developments, it can be any of them like e-filing systems, like digital case management, remote hearings, everything that anything that comes to your mind.
Do you think any of these developments improved access to justice, or do you believe that they created any inequalities for certain groups?

INT04   31:08
OK, I believe in the data.
Firm already implement some and I believe that it will help the legal system for the court. I I know that they try to develop the system and there's a group or community.
They rise that they need to change. They try to implement but the but the speed is not up to what we want. They have they create the E filing.
But it kind of normal as in normal government project that is up to the standard of the private practice developing the technology.

Marta Basystiuk   32:06
Perfect. And how accessible do you in general would say that either civil or criminal or if you want labor justice mechanisms are for ordinary people?

INT04   32:23
Everyone can access the the legal system. Yes, I think it's very accessible.

Marta Basystiuk   32:29
And I will move on. Maybe we will talk more about efficiency or effectiveness. We are seeing that delays are a big issue according to our data.
Can I ask you how do you assess in general the efficiency and quality of either civil labour or criminal justice in practice?

INT04   32:56
Um.
We know that going to the trial take times is not just only in Thailand. In other country, especially those who use the jury system, the the trial period is long too.
Yeah, that is quite normal in uh.
In the legal practice and all the all the lawyer understand it, we heard a lot from from the customer of the system that it take long and delay the justice.
Is not a justice for themselves, but if you ask a lawyer who understand the system, of course with the with the this number of cases, this number of the resources is is normal way and not just only in Thailand, in other country too.
And then I I I try to like this parameter, but then when discussed about the case going to the type part, for sure one case should be about 8 months to 10 months.
Is that too long? I would say we need to it take long time because the the system is still trying to balance the efficiency and that and allow the.
The time for the people to defend the case and several cases take long time because of the tactic of the lawyer in delay in the case, not because of the system itself doesn't provide the the court try to expedite the process, but the lawyer.
Opposite side someone to delay the kit and create that tactic. So the whole the for the long time the length of the trial. It cannot be banned on the legal system itself, but because of every people in in the system, sometimes they don't see the same thing.
Uh, for the people who's pipe pain teeth, how sure they want to be? But for the different then sometimes they want to delay the case.

Marta Basystiuk   35:14
And what do you think beyond delays? What other things can affect or undermine the effectiveness of the justice system? It can be costs, procedural complexity, maybe corruption risks, maybe enforcement failures.
Maybe even political pressures, whatever that you observe, do you think that there is anything else that again undermines the effectiveness?

INT04   35:43
I don't see. Oh, can I get back to, can I get back to to to your previous question on the time for the? Yeah, because I I'm not. I I also do ambitation and.

Marta Basystiuk   35:51
Absolutely.
Mhm.

INT04   35:59
Ambitation is both party pay money, pay money to to to increase the efficiency and select their own ambitator. They have money to invest. Those ambitation doesn't take shorter time than litigation.

Marta Basystiuk   36:06
Mm-hmm.
Ending.

INT04   36:18
Even though those have resources, so then that's why I try to conclude that for the for the lunch of the trial and the period in the call.
With the market of the court at this moment, with the people in the system try to delay the process, that's what we got. It's not because of the failure of the system.

Marta Basystiuk   36:50
And you wouldn't highlight any other aspects that can potentially affect negatively. Perfect, yes. And then, you know, we are also using those interviews to ask about the developments, but I'm also very curious about your experience when it comes to.

INT04   36:56
No, I don't.

Marta Basystiuk   37:10
Um.
Different types of initiatives that can potentially improve some of the aspects of the justice system, because in our report we also would like to highlight.
Either the insights or conclusions that can better inform policy makers. So in your view, in in what ways do you think Thailand still need to improve in civil criminal labor justice?
Or where do you do, do you do you see flags behind?

INT04   37:42
Mm-hmm. I would say if you ask me, uh, we should develop the system of the.
I will practice. I'm a lawyer and then I don't say that I wonder in in Thailand we use the system of the loser pay for the for the cost of litigation.
For the winner, but at the heart will award the loyal fee.
But the lawyer fee that the court award is not the real amount that the the party pay for the lawyer is is much it's it's really small amount when the court award.
And even we have the car section and we know that the car section is the system where we want we encourage the the private lawyer to be the watchdog and bring the cast action in order to to get the lawyer fee.
That the law allow the court award up to 30% of the total award and people without the law think that this will increase the the reward and increase the attraction for the lawyer to be the watchdog of the system.
But once the case go to the court, the high court still really conservative and award really less amount, really small amount. That's why right now no lawyer want to be the the transaction lawyer because it's not worth for them to do.
Uh, I'm. I'm on the view of if the I don't say that I want that because I'm a lawyer, but I think this system is the incentive.
For the lawyer and for the party to to do the case and if the lawyer fee is high and the court award high amount, in turn people will think both side will think logically, listen, listen about.
Whether or not they would settle the case or not settle the case because of their potential expenses to pay and then it in turn it will reduce the number of case going to the court.
And once the number of kids going to the trial is reduced, the card will have more more resources to expedite the process and give the whole system more efficiency.
And see.

Marta Basystiuk   40:26
Overall, thank you. That's very interesting. Thank you so much for pointing this out. So I don't have question about the civil justice and I'm wondering whether you will be comfortable with answering about criminal justice or whether you'd like us to.
Maybe cover a couple of questions that relate generally to political, social rights, civic participation. Please guide me whatever your preference is and maybe Santiago jump in if if there is anything that I skipped and you you think that it's super important for us.

INT04   40:48
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yes, yes, you can ask me anything because I also do criminal law, but I don't do the the real criminal law such as murder case. I also do criminal law on the commercial side.

Marta Basystiuk   41:03
Cover.
Yeah.
Then I'll ask you the the general question, but again, I will be even more specific about the criminal justice performance. I'm now looking at the data and again it it it shows the gradual improvement of the overall criminal justice performance.

INT04   41:25
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   41:34
And the largest improvement over the last 10 years we see in the absence of improper government influence in criminal justice. And this indicator specifically has improved by 50% over the last 10 years.
Public perception also point in the same direction. So we have a lot of people who feel that the system operates independently. From your experience, do you agree 1st? And from your experience, what explains this improvement?

INT04   41:54
Mhm.
I I would say I would agree with that comment and I would say that the court also try to improve the system. The evidence is that.
The news report that the system, the system expelled the judge who they filed received bribe in granting bail to the drug dealer. So some may say that is the that is the evidence that the the judge had.
Five and the case is not like it's not good. But another way around I I see that the the legal system and the and the court system try to do improve themselves. That's why we got that evidence.

Marta Basystiuk   42:58
And then I'll ask you about the indicators that are having the lowest scores, and I'm wondering whether you would approve with with what we are seeing according to our survey data. So the lowest score is seen for the correctional system's effectiveness in reducing criminal behavior.
As well as in impartiality, investigative effectiveness, again timeliness, I would say that delays are an issue everywhere and due process and the rights of the accused. Can you tell us which of these areas concern you most and why?
Or if there is any other area that you think is of the most concern for you and you'd like to highlight when it comes to criminal adjudication, can you please tell us which one and why?

INT04   43:53
Yeah, I I would say that if you ask me from the top of my mind, I would say that we in Thailand, we use criminal law too much. A lot of thing is criminal offenses.
Even though they should not be, especially for the regulatory criminal offenses, not pay the wages.
Forget to pay the servants pay is criminal offense. We use criminal offense or criminal prosecution far more than other country and the criminal prosecution process is take long and it's.
That's why people tend to use criminal offense or criminal prosecution as the bargaining power to put pressure on opposite side.

Marta Basystiuk   44:55
And.

INT04   44:57
And uh, the once the chairs go to the court is burdensome for the for the defendants.
And once the the case got dismissed, the remedy the if the case got dismissed, the the defendant who win the case cannot get the compensation or remedy from what the plaintiff.
Put them on.

Marta Basystiuk   45:31
I I will be honest with you. I am based in in the US and I feel like many Americans would want not non-payment of severance to be a criminal act because here employers are not required to pay any severance pay at all. So this is.

INT04   45:44
OK.
Mm-hmm.

Marta Basystiuk   45:51
Good to know this is an, I would say, something that the US would want to quarrel, at least on the side of employees.

INT04   45:57
Yeah, but for the employees side is so depend though if the if the employee permanent employment.
Without wrongdoing from the employee in Thailand, we need to pay for rents pay, but sometime the employee is still conduct the wrongdoing such as.
Such as receive undertable money from the supplier.
The employer found out that this wrongdoing and then the employer terminate the employment without giving servants pay. The employee side is failed, bring the criminal offence against the employer.
And prevent the case that they did not receive anything as undertable money and put the picture on the employer that they admit the criminal offense by not paying them the students pay.
So another way around the employees want to abuse the system.

Marta Basystiuk   47:08
This is an important example, so thank you for bringing us it to our attention.
I'm seeing that we are already at time, and I'd like to check in with you whether you'd like to finish up to wrap up this conversation, or would you have time to answer one or two questions up to you?

INT04   47:27
Yes, I still have time.

Marta Basystiuk   47:31
Then I'll put Santiago on the spot and ask Santiago.
If you want to ask any questions or I can ask, if you don't mind, we have two sections that I haven't touched upon. One is civil and political rights and the 2nd is on participation and access to information.
Can you tell us whether you'd like me to start with any of the political rights, or in general, civil rights, or you'd like more to talk about access to information and civic participation in general?

INT04   48:08
Anything. Anything you can ask me.

Marta Basystiuk   48:09
Love it. Thank you. Thank you for the flexibility. So I'll start with civic participation because it's something that we are seeing that many of our previous experts with whom we already had conversations they.
Brought it to our attention. So our data shows that there is an overall decline when it comes to civic participation and then access to information over the last five years. At the same time, when we look more specifically on the data that is coming from the general population, we are seeing that.

INT04   48:31
OK.

Marta Basystiuk   48:46
People are saying that government information is easier to access, it's more understandable and we are wondering whether this aligns with your understanding and how in general do you assess public engagement and government transparency in practice?
What do you think can explain this mixed picture of overall data showing the decline, but then general population might have a more positive perception?

INT04   49:14
It depends on what kind of data you are talking about. Uh, I understand that for the public opinion in general, they may ask, they may think, they may think about the normal in information.
That they want, that is the the the Goldman tried to make it easier to to get.
Something like if you want to know who owned the land, who owned the share in the company, the the government try to make it more accessible because it will get more investor to come to the country.
And making more efficiency. But if you're talking about the information that like the bidding process or how the money the government spend.
Something like that. It's very difficult to to get and there are a movement at the there's some movement one to set the the system more accessible to those type of information.

Marta Basystiuk   50:27
Thank you. And what about the public participation? Would you say it also depends on the topic around which people might discuss or might gather around to to do something with it? Or do you think that in general public participation in?
Influencing in a good way any of the public decisions, decision making processes are actually.
Positively seen by you. Have you seen any? I'm trying to find a neutral language, not to steer you in one or another direction, because I want you to give us an honest opinion as as for.

INT04   50:59
I would say positive. I don't say things.
Hmm.

Marta Basystiuk   51:12
How you see?

INT04   51:14
A big participate. I don't know how to comment on this because I don't see thing.

Marta Basystiuk   51:18
OK, we can move on. That's that's perfect. No problem at all then.
To what extent do you think civil society or independent media, non governmental actors, they can actually scrutinize government actions? Do you think they can do it freely or do you think they?
Uh.
that there is any type of pressure that comes with with this.

INT04   51:49
They can do it freely. And they did. And they did. Even to me, it's go beyond. They don't take responsibility when they criticize people. People can say things without evidence.

Marta Basystiuk   51:52
OK.

INT04   52:06
And then the government need to defend and some politician may find the defamation action. And again the another thing is they said that we use the tactic to.

Marta Basystiuk   52:15
Mhm.

INT04   52:25
To slap people, not to say, but then when the case go take a long time for one year and the court result that the the one who say thing doesn't have any evidence to prove.

Marta Basystiuk   52:40
I'm so sorry, I I just maybe I missed it. I just wanted to clarify. So the defamation cases are against the politicians or against those who participate in in in different types of activities.

INT04   52:41
And.
OK, yeah, OK. Your question is that whether the public can have opinion or the media or anyone can criticize the government freely. My answer is in my feeling.
They can criticize the government freely, and they did. And sometimes I feel that they did it without thinking about responsibility. I saw some cases where if they want to accuse anyone.
Did you say so and?
Then the politician or the government is the one who need to present, then say or defend that that and some politician even find a defamation is against the media.

Marta Basystiuk   53:40
It.
OK.

INT04   53:58
Long time and the result is that of course they defame the politician and government and right now with the going on the social media, everything people doesn't have no longer have responsibility even saying things.

Marta Basystiuk   54:00
OK.
Thank you for clarifying that. I I have one last question about compliant compliant mechanism compliant. I'm thinking about compliance all the time. Our data shows that confidence, the general confidence in compliant mechanisms has weakened.
And we'd like to know your opinion. Do you agree with this assessment? And if someone has a problem with public authority, where they can realistically turn?

INT04   54:51
But you mentioned about compliance. Uh, can you elaborate more on which sense?

Marta Basystiuk   54:58
Yeah, it can be any any of the channels that basically are available in Thailand.
I I don't want to nudge you in in One Direction or another, but it might not necessarily be courts, but maybe any administrative institutions that can handle the complaints coming from the citizens because of the, let's say.
Services are delivered by state authorities, not in the most effective ways, and they would like to file the complaint to make sure that this process will be or the service will be improved. You can take whatever case you'd like to comment on the complaint mechanisms.

INT04   55:33
Um.

Marta Basystiuk   55:49
So if if in general, if the public is not happy with with some processes, is there any established process through which they can file a complaint and influence OK?

INT04   56:00
Yes.
Yes.
I I try to think because we we we we have the we we we know the ecosystem understand that problem. That's why in the past we set up or establish the.
Court and build the additive law and we have the the law that if the government of official.
OK, they also have a another law.
That's all the government agency need to publish their work for, including the time and period. How, when, how long they're gonna respond to that request or something. That is another law.
And then if the if the.
The risk doesn't come out according to the work for at the period of time. The people can can take the case to the admin and mitigative law, the administrative court.
So to tell you we have system, we we understand the problem. We create a a system to to tackle those problem but in practice.
It's not. It's still not yet effective in in my idea.

Marta Basystiuk   57:39
That's why you agree with what our data shows, because we are seeing the weakening of the system. Perfect. So that was my final question and then I will wrap up the conversation. Is there anything that we haven't covered but you think is very important for us to be aware of when we analyze the the status of the fundamental rights in Thailand?

INT04   57:41
Yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   57:59
And and if so, what? What is that?

INT04   58:02
When I I I read your report in several year and it's just my own opinion. I I think some question is so depend on who you talk to.
In my opinion, if you talk to me, I would say something that I represent the business sector. If you ask for my eye, I see the people of building systems.

Marta Basystiuk   58:19
Mhm.
Mhm.

INT04   58:33
But if you go to talk to the people in general or people in the factory or the NGO, you might heard from their own eye that sometimes we will do it. Where did you get it from?

Marta Basystiuk   58:45
Yeah.
We are also conducting the interviews with different representatives, but that's exactly why we want to understand different opinions and have an opportunity to put the insights from different representatives into the report so that we have this holistic.

INT04   58:57
Mm.

Marta Basystiuk   59:08
Assessment, not assessment, but we holistically provide the information of how different perspectives are in Thailand. So it's very important for us to know yours. And then I always like this of my last question. I always ask all of our interviewees to describe.

INT04   59:10
Hmm.
Hmm.
That.
Hmm.

Marta Basystiuk   59:28
The how they assess the fundamental rights situation in Thailand in one sentence. Can you please do it in one sentence or in a phrase?

INT04   59:37
Getting getting improving, getting improved.


