INT02

Santiago Pardo   1:43
Thank you very much. Let me introduce myself. I am Santiago Pardo. I am the Senior Data Analyst of War Justice Projects and the one who is leading this report about human rights in Thailand.
And I have for you an icebreaker question for you both. Basically I want to start knowing how do you assess the current state of fundamental rights in Thailand right now?

INT02   2:18
You said icebreaker. I thought it was going to be fun. How do we assess the current situation? Do you mean how do we go about assessing or what is our assessment?

Santiago Pardo   2:31
What are your assessment about the current situation in in in Thailand? In fundamental rights, of course.

INT02   2:32
What is assessment? OK.
Yeah. So I think Thailand is a a place of both some very good progress and some continuing barriers and obstacles. I start with the progress because we should always start with those things that are hopeful and that they can drive further change.
Um, last year, uh, on 23rd January 20 Twenty-five, Thailand, uh passed the Equal Marriage Law, and this was a huge step forward, uh, from a legislative perspective in enshrining in law the the rights for.
All couples to to marry, irrespective of gender. And I'd say it's beyond the question of marriage. It actually brings opportunities and equality in terms of inheritance rights, in terms of having children, in terms of access to health care and benefits to.
A marginalized, an otherwise marginalized group from LGBT community. And for that perspective, I think it was extremely landmark legislation making Thailand the first country in Southeast Asia, I think the second in Asia after Nepal. Um.
To put in place that kind of regulation. So in that sense, last year Thailand joined, I think 30s, thirty-eight countries in the world now that have a similar legislation in place to protect, uh, equal marriage, uh, irrespective of gender. And I want to stress it's marriage irrespective of gender. It's not just.
It's the same sex law. It actually goes broader than that because of the inheritance rights and so on. And at the same time, that equal marriage law increased the age of marriage consent to 18. So it actually brought Thailand in line with international law on the protection of children. So for me, that was a huge bright spot.
Last year. Um. And in terms of the ability, therefore, to go further and to now use that law as a basis to support people's lived experience of equality and and and human rights, um, that's it's a strong basis to build from.
Um.
That is a good example. I'd say there's still work to be done there. Even with, um, the LGBT community in particular, um, there's, uh, legislation being drafted at the moment, anti discrimination legislation. There is legislation on the right to uh.
Legal gender recognition, there's legislation on the decriminalisation of sex work and all of these things that they are being considered is very positive. That they are not finished yet is an opportunity for Thailand to kind of demonstrate its continued commitment.
In the space of human rights, I would say amongst all of those things, the one I'm particularly interested in seeing is the anti discrimination legislation, because I think N has benefits beyond the community in particular as a counterbalance perhaps for some of the other challenges that we see still.
But really on the positive, I don't know. Do you want to add anything on the positive side before we can switch to the challenging side?

INT03   5:52
Yes, thank you, INT02. From my side, maybe I highlight another key progress for Thailand on the business and human rights. Thailand has been, you know, the first country with the adoption of the stand-alone National Action Plan on Business and Human Rights.
Since 2019. So after that we we actually that time Thailand got the recommendation from the Universal Predict reviews particularly from from Sweden that we should you know handle the case or business related violations in Thailand.
Basically, you know, harassment against human rights defenders and also judicial harassment in the form of slap case. So that's how it came up to the Thai government that we should have the policy framework that outlying, you know, responsibility of the private sector and also.
You know the the government on protecting and promoting and accountability of the business sector when it's come to human rights related matter. So we as a UNDP we are working to support implementation of the National Action Plan.
And a very good new last year, the government would like to move forward from the mandatory, you know, NAP, a voluntary NAP to the mandatory, you know, registration. So now the government is in the process of drafting the mandatory human right due diligence.

INT02   7:12
I spoke.

INT03   7:23
Which is the process for the private sector to identify, mitigate any human rights, risks and impact associated with their own operation and also supply chain. So follow the journey of the EU. I'm sure that you are aware that the EU just adopted the corporate sustainability.
Due diligence. So now the, you know, the company register in the EU, they would need to set up the process called human right due diligence within that one operation and also supply chain. So this kind of movement, you know, extend beyond.
The the mandate of the government to ensure that the law can protect people in Thailand, but now also extend accountability to the business sector.

INT02   8:10
And maybe Santiago, I'm going to kind of add to this and it is a good icebreaker because you you you can pick and choose from this then rather than going to the different specific questions even. But you know we see a lot of external.
Constructive external factors that are influencing Thailand's thinking and decision-making. And that's quite pragmatic. You know, Thailand, for example, joined the the Human Rights Council in 2023, three or four, four.

INT03   8:46
3.

INT02   8:46
433 and.
You know that was a signal of respect for international standards and rules and norms and and you see that signal of respect for the international rules based order coming through quite strongly.
Almost irrespective of rapid turnover in political cycles. Um, so we've had in 18 months, 4 prime ministers, um, different cabinets, different political parties, different.
Parties in government, but the one thing that I've been.
That you're looking to is whether or not that respect for the international norms and standards holds. And it does. Um, now again, not just altruistically. I think it holds because Thailand also perceives it in its interest to hold in a couple of different ways. So firstly.
Um, Pinny mentioned the the European Union. Thailand's in the process of negotiating a free trade agreement with the EU, which hopefully will conclude, if not this, then next year. Thailand's also in the process of negotiating free trade agreements bilaterally with most EU countries, not most many of the big EU countries.
And therefore it is getting organised in terms of its narrative, its legislative framework, its accountability measures with with the business sector to be able to trade with Europe and European countries. So it's quite again a pragmatic lens.
The second one is around OECD accession. So Thailand has announced it wanted to exceed to the OECD. The accession pathway started last November 2024 and the road map is underway at the moment.
Again, OECD accession comes with a very intensive list of governance reforms and human rights issues that need to be addressed, and Thailand has committed to doing that. Now how quickly it moves there? Question mark, right? But again, that external opportunity of OECD accession.
Has brought the government, I think quite pragmatically to the the door of of talking about some justice and governance related reforms that maybe wouldn't otherwise have done. Um. Third is with respect to Uh.
Conflict. So you would have seen the Cambodia Thailand conflict. Um Thailand was the first country to actually um.
Call up the the Ottawa Convention, which I'm trying to remember the article or the other is Article 8 of the Ottawa Convention, but basically the Convention on Landmines and what happens if two countries don't come to an agreement.
On the use of landmines and.
It is at the moment on Thailand's to Thailand's decision as to what they want to do next that they've gone through the whole process over the last year of using the Uh International Ottawa Convention to try and argue a case to show that they are, uh, not the aggressors, let's say, in the conflict with Thailand or with Cambodia.
And and they have used that legislative international human rights and and legislative framework very carefully and strategically. And if they do then, you know, employ this article, it would be the first country in the world to do so.
So I see the external kind of international rules based system, including based on the UN Charter, based on the international legal framework, is being used quite strategically by Thailand at the moment.
The next question then is how does that?
Go beyond a kind of a narrative and a trade agenda to actually influence, let's say, human rights based approaches here in Thailand as well. And I think that's where we still see that there's some room for for progress.
Which I guess I should come to the second part of the question and the the negative stuff, right? Well, not negative, but you know the opportunity.

Santiago Pardo   13:00
Yes, but I have a very quick question there because we have been talking with some experts from the Deep South and you mentioned the conflict with Cambodia, but I want to to to focus in the Internet conflict.

INT02   13:06
Sure.
Mhm.

Santiago Pardo   13:16
And there I want to know if the.
What is your assessment about the the the fundamental rights there in the Deep South and if this progress that you are mentioning are balanced across all the country or there is some exceptions to the rule there?

INT02   13:39
I mean, I I.
Even just on the premise of whether the progress is balanced across the country, I I'm not even sure yet if this policy and legislative decisions are being felt in the country yet, right? As in, I'm not sure. Um, I I think that they're they're the starting points.
And now they need to be implemented, right? In general, then we're looking at the question of the southern border provinces, you know, so we've done some research recently, which we'll publish actually in the next couple of months and we can share with you as well.
Trying to look at human development in all the border areas, um, and taking it as a a lens, looking at again the challenges and opportunities based on the very particular contexts. So that might be of use to you, um, in the southern border provinces.
I think something that surprised me and Tin Tinny, I'd be curious to hear your view on this, was how little is known about the situation in the southern border provinces of Thailand, outside of Thailand. It's a very quiet kind of continuing reality. And I say this as someone coming from Ireland, right, who's lived the kind of.

Santiago Pardo   14:47
Mm.

INT02   14:53
Northern Ireland troubles for decades and whatnot, where there's much more spotlight. There was much more international spotlight and understanding of conflict, um, in Northern Ireland. Um, I I think that the the situation in the South remains heavily kind of security driven. Um, you see continuing.
Um, deeper pockets of poverty. Uh, you see issues like, for example, our work on climate action, and we're trying to focus in on some of the poorest provinces in the South. And through that lens of climate action, you see continue issued around gender equality or.

INT03   15:17
Hmm.

INT02   15:33
Lack thereof, um of female headed households not having the support that they need, um of, you know, less budget going to those areas most in need. Um, with this over kind of underlying security reality, um, I'll give you an anecdote.

INT03   15:42
And.

INT02   15:51
We were filming, um we were doing a a a film called Ma about this mother and her uh her family who uh are trying to make their way through a really changing um climate as a kind of fisher family.
Um, and at one point we had a video of her riding her son to school on a motorbike, and the law had just come into play that everyone should be wearing a helmet when they're riding a motorbike. So I said, hang on a second, we can't show that woman.
On the motorbikes in the editing phase, should we, you know, should we do a retake? Should we make sure she puts a helmet on? What should we do? And the team came back to me and they had checked and they said for security reasons they're not allowed to wear helmets in the southern border provinces when they're riding on the motorbikes.
And that really struck me, right? So it's one rule for everybody else. Big push in Bangkok, safety helmets, helmets, helmets. And that little anecdote says an awful lot about it's a different context and a different sense of freedom and opportunity, particularly for Muslim communities in the southern border provinces.
Um, but I speak more anecdotally than, you know, factually. Um. And you know, to be be clear on that, uh, you know, there are special security measures that continue to be in place. There's the Martial Law Act, emergency decree on public administration and emergency situations.
Um, to my knowledge, those things continue and there is a curtailment of civil liberties as a result of that. Um, how that manifests, I think, you know, it's been a couple of years since we have had a team based in the South fully.
Um. And so, uh, probably the best, most updated sources would be that border report that we're we're bringing out soon. Um, but and the insight that we're gaining through our work on on climate action, which it's just a very different conversation in the deep side to pretty much anywhere else.
Um, I would stress though, every border is different in Thailand, like remarkably so. Situation in Myanmar with the persons living in camps on the border there. Fundamentally different conversation, different geopolitics. The situation in Cambodia, fundamentally different, different geopolitics. S different, different geopolitics. North.
With Lao at the moment, still no issues there, but different geopolitics, you know, strong Chinese engagement and so on. So you in a way, Thailand has a a very diverse, uh, set of challenges and again, therefore opportunities to kind of do things well.

Santiago Pardo   18:34
OK, let's pause about the challenges. I'm very curious to know your opinion about the challenges right now in Thailand in terms of human rights.

INT02   18:46
So.
I think one of the challenges that continues is around.
It's this dual role, right? You've got a lot more space, I think, for people to gather and protest, but that space is still very carefully monitored.
Those spaces online now as well are a challenge, and we see this in terms of issues around misinformation and hate speech, whether it's on the Cambodia border and the Myanmar border, both. And this is emanating both from the problems with scam centres.
And the conflict of Cambodia and general misinformation and, you know, push back against migrants in in Thailand, you know, so there's a cacophony, I think at the moment of nationalism that's rising in Thailand because of these different.
Things that are playing out on each border, um, it's a kind of trend you see in other countries as well. At the moment, Thailand is not alone in that respect. Um, but for example, ahead of this election, which just happened on Sunday and the Conservative Party.
We came in with a landslide victory, unexpected landslide victory. There was a lot more flags flying. There was a lot more nationalist sentiment that came to the fore for the narrative. So I think that for starters, that's a.
That's something to be to be cautious of and to be aware of. What that then translates into is how anyone who speaks up against what's considered the establishment.
Um is treated and I think there that's where we still see a lot of space for improvement. Um. So for example, a couple of years ago through Um Pinney and Team's work, we produced Um a a report on slaps in Thailand, strategic lawsuits against public participation.
Slap and again very carefully developed and published report, but the the findings of that report still remain true today and I would ask Pinny maybe in a moment to speak a little bit to that.
But the kind of broad challenge we're seeing is that when people speak out, they are being subject to both civil and criminal prosecution. Now, and there's some measures in place to kind of help that, you know, there was this Data Privacy Act and there's other.
That are coming to place, but then on the other side you have this Computer Crime Act which is increasingly being used and.
You can be then held accountable for something you say, something you're repost and face criminal, you know, charges and jail time without there being a very clear reason other than you've spoken up against.
The establishment. So we when I say the establishment, I'm not even specifying any part of the establishment. I'm just saying the the powerful, um, and I think the powerful extends through public and private.
Spaces and the very strong influence of the private sector and large private sector here in Thailand as well. What we see is that journalists, civil society activists, human rights defenders.
Environmental defenders, youth who might, you know, have thought themselves just youth with a voice and then get the label of activist are being.
Held accountable, let's say, through civil and criminal prosecution. And that is that creates. I'm careful about using the word fear, right? Because that's a that's me assuming it's creating fear, but rather that.
Certainly creates a a chilling effect on people speaking up. So as UNDP for example, we're trying to pull together all the threads of work that we have in this area into specifically an agents of change portfolio to which focuses on helping people.
To hold the civic space. So we work with youth, particularly, you know, young entrepreneurs who might want to be the next generation of sustainable, positive business owners. We work with media and the media fellowship program helping the media to report positively and so on. So there's, you know, this kind of we work the business through Penny's work.
To try and put in place ESG standards, mechanisms, training and so on, because we see the need to hold that civic space open. Amy, do you want to come in on the ERH work?

INT03   23:47
Thank you. Thank you, Nate. Nate, give a very comprehensive pictures of the challenges in Thailand with regard to human rights. Maybe I just share with you, I would like to share with you, you know that some key fighting of our slap and human rights study. So as Nate mentions, we we documented the case of.
Slab in Thailand, you know back to 20 years ago, so from 1997 to June 2022, so quite you know long periods of time. So just only the business related slab action we found that nearly you know.
100 cases so far and when we dig deeper to the case, we found that you know just the same face of the company keep doing, you know, suing people. So this is actually reflects something about you know the awareness of this particular business sector. We found that this sector.
You know, you can call them as a high risk sector, for example, the mining company, the agricultural company and etcetera. So this one also reflects the international community concern through the UN Working Group on Business and Human Rights who, you know, passed the recommendation.
In Thailand, you know two consecutive years about the use of slab practice in Thailand. So we also have a chance to talk with the researcher when doing this study. They say that if you would like to also collect the data of the slab practice of the government authority.
You know, can you imagine it's could up to 1000 case, you know as of now as of today. So it's quite interesting because the the state also kind of like using the existing, you know, legislation as Nick mentions, we have the computer crime acts, you know you can post anything or even you just reshare the post.
They can capture that as a evident and sue you in case of defamation, right. So in the past they even have the law to protect the government authority from doing that. So that's why the case has been, you know, increased significantly from the from the government authority.
Are suing journalists or normal people. So that's quite interesting. And another, you know, critical factor. I'm sure that maybe you have heard from interview other expert is about the limitations of the freedom of expression due to the Article 112, the less majestic.
This also the reflections from the UN working group or even you know the last Universal Predict review for Thailand. I think at least like 5 country mentioned that the Thailand should considering like you know do some adjustment or reforms of the article 112 because you cannot say anything you know related to the monarchy in the.
In the bad way otherwise you will you know be your your your speech or your post will be used for the evidence in you know for the prosecution. So that's I think and maybe another challenges that I would like to highlight here because I saw.
that you know in the draft index report right that you got produced we got quite a low score on the labor protections here because we under this project we also work closely with the government on this issue and we found that you know there are still some key challenges for Thailand in terms of you know compliance
With the international standard, especially on the ILO conventions, still two main core ILO conventions that Thailand, you know in the process of ratifying, you know, put the attempt to to ratify, which is about, you know, freedom of association and also.
Rise to collective bargaining Convention 87 and 98. So this has been the concern from the international community as well, because over here under the Labor Protection law, we still have no rights for the worker to.
Form the labor union. So this translate to the practice of the company over here that you will see that the majority of the company would decide to not, you know, give rise to to the worker to form the labor union.
Or some company, you know they do because the practice, you know the policy from the headquarter oversee. You know we just have the case of Nike. But again the the mindset and the awareness of the rise of people on the, you know, collective bargainings and also the freedom of association is still.
Very limited. So most of the case when the, you know, the workers from the union, you know, start to negotiating or protest, they end up with the retaliations by the company. So yeah.

Santiago Pardo   28:51
Many things and many takes about all your answers here. I am really for for me is a really good sign that the external factors.
Are affecting the decision making in Thailand. This is something that is is is very important to highlight and and thank you very much for this.
Now that that that we are talking about the challenges, this is the perfect introduction to a the following question about freedom of expression. So as you could see in our report.
And before that, let me let me make a a a very quick parenthesis about the analysis that we did there. We assess experts indicators.
How how the experts indicators about these rights changes in the five light in the in the in the in the last five years and 10 years ago and also we compare the public.
The the the people perceptions about these topics in the last five years. So given that context, I want to ask about the freedom of opinion that that is one of the challenges that you mentioned.
And for us, this is a very interesting topic because according to our experts, they tend to think that the situation has worsened in the recent years, however, the general public reports.
The the general public's opinion show some improvements in this area. So for you and and I I can't anticipate your answer, but for you, how comfortable are people expressing political opinions publicly or privately or privately today?
And for you, what might explain the gap between rofessional assessment and the public perception perception in in this specific topic?

INT02   31:11
Pini, do you want to go first as you're from Thailand or do you want me to go first?

INT03   31:15
OK. Maybe just, you know, from from my perspective, right, I think during the the coup, of course, you know people, you know, you still can say it, but again, if you say it probably, you know, there are so many.
You know, laws over there that can you can end up in trouble, like, you know, the curfew law, the emergency law, right. So people, I think they're still discussing the the politics, you know, related matter, but maybe privately among a small group. But now we have, you know, since last five years we have the.
And you know, government, so people tend to speak up more. But again, there's still limitation in terms of other, you know, registration like the Computer Crime Act and you know, we we just have a new one on the sexual harassment on the online platforms acts, you know.
So at the same time it's the good law you know to to kind of like you you can exercise you your right to speak you know on this platform but on the other hand it's also can silent you to you know to to sharing your opinion.
Publicly on the online platform. So it can be both way. I think you know that's how I perceive the situation, but I'm the one of the issue that Thai people never ever, you know, been to speak.
Up, you know, privately or no publicly is about the issue of the the the majestic, the monarchy. You know, it has been like that. And you can see the example of the last election, right, where one party has been dissolved, even they grained the majority vote because they they were, you know, criticized and were sued at the end by the Constitutional Court.
About, you know, promoting, you know, the reform of Article 112. So I think that one is a very sensitive for Thai people, even though they have a good intentions to kind of like the adjust and reform the law to use in the good intention.
But again, when people hearing the word like you, you want to remove the Article 112, you know it's a big deal for for Thai, especially the the conservative people with, you know, I I would say that it's still a majority of the population.

INT02   33:36
Maybe to add to that, uh Santiago, it's super interesting just even looking at the election result, um uh and how you know, maybe the the the country is, you know, has two parts in a way, right? If you look at Bangkok, um.
All party three parliamentary constituency seats, I think it was, went to the Progressive Party.
Um, even though the Conservative Party that won the election had a landslide win basically everywhere else in the country. And so in a way you have a a Thailand of Bangkok and a Thailand of outside Bangkok. So within Bangkok, I think there's a lot more um.
There's a lot more progressive leaning thinking and a lot more people willing to push the boundary to speak up to, let's say, challenge convention or, you know, challenge the the status quo.
And outside Bangkok, I think a lot less so. I I would say Chiang Mai also, interestingly, Chiang Mai also went to the Progressive Party, so the other big city. And and I again, I see that just as a litmus test to say that in the urban centres.
People are are pushing a more progressive agenda, um, whereas conservatives is dominating elsewhere. And that also then speaks to the the question of perception, right? Um, is there a perception in Bangkok that things are getting worse or better? I don't know, right? I think there's a perception that.
Um, it kind of shift from a a warfare to a lawfare context. And that's something that kind of a narrative that you hear here that it's now about lawfare. Um, that you know, there may not be a reason or need for a coup because you know, you can play out whatever needs to be played out through the court system as needed. Um, that's something that you hear.
Um.
There's, uh, there was a lot of upset after the 20 Twenty-three election, um, when the the party that won was not in a position or not not permitted to form a government and members of that party were banned from, uh, for politics for a decade.
And I think that there was a lot of desire in the progressive camp to see that change in the election this weekend and a lot of disappointment when that didn't change and perhaps then a re reaffirmation that indeed.
It's still a deeply conservative base, made more so by the nationalist sentiment. I think that has been, uh, developing over the course of 2025, uh, including with respect to Cambodia.

Santiago Pardo   36:21
This is very interesting and that.
It's also a good introduction for the following questions, and it's about freedom of assembly and association.
Basically we are also see some gravel gains in freedoms of assembly according to the experts and also according to people perceptions, there are some improvements.
Do you agree with this assessment and?
Most specifically, are you are people generally able to organise, join groups or unions or protest peacefully?

INT02   37:05
I I think it very much depends on what you're protesting, where you're protesting, who you are. Um, that's my, that's my sense. Uh, I don't think there's any problem with protesting. We see that often, you know, people on the street protesting. It just very much depends on.
What you say and who you're criticising and.
Let's say what we see is an increased willingness of the the systems in power, including the legislative system, to use its controls against people that say things that are not in line with what they.
Believe so an increased sense and I I'm here I don't we don't have exactly the data on that increase but increased sense of the use of the judicial system plus plus the legislative framework.
To have that chilling effect, or if not silence, um, people who do do speak up at the same time, there's plenty of protests that take place, you know, and the freedom of assembly in terms of public assembly and whatnot, uh, is there, even though there's legislation.
I'm trying to remember the name of the legislation that that would limit that depending on what, yeah, the Public Assembly Act and depending on what they're gathering about. So it genuinely is, I think it's context is super important. I I think the point that company made earlier about the.
And formal Uh protections gaps Uh including like on the ILO conventions of like the formal freedom of association and protection that those elements is still are still in progress Um and I think that would demonstrate a significant shift if they were to come into play because that would also bring the.
The private sector, it would mean that the government agrees to bring the private sector into line with issues around freedom of association and assembly and that I think would be a significant step step forward. Pini, don't know if you want to add anything.

INT03   39:13
Yes, thank you, Neet. Maybe I just highlight a bit of your last point about the private sector engagement on this agenda, right. I think, you know, currently Thai government has been pressured by the, you know, many country, especially the EU because we are doing the trade negotiation with the EU. One of the condition is that Thailand will need.
to, you know, ensure the rise of the collective bargaining for workers and also the rise, you know, to form the association, right? So this had been the pain point for Thailand. But, you know, we we also have engaged, you know, closely on on this issue with the Ministry of Justice and Ministry of Labour under the implementation.
Representations on the NAP. So there are several around the discussion with the private sector and a lot of lobbyings and you know, resistance from the private sector because our national law, you know, still didn't include this right to rise in under the Labor Protection Act.
And even the migrant workers, they have no right to forms any, you know, unions at the moment. So this is actually reflect, you know something that you know, you know on this issue the the the entrepreneur and the employer are still quite, you know, like.
Reluctant to go forward. So we hope to see the progress next year and especially Thailand now making the partway to OECD exceptions and the the topics of the responsible business conduct is one of the, you know, requirement, right.
So this one, Thailand, you need to, you know, show the international community that they make the progress on this topic in particular. And also another one relating to the right to, you know, collective bargaining is another challenging topic for the private sector is about.
About the providing the living wage, the concept of living wage, I'm sure that you are doing the assessment around this. You know, in many country, you know in our constitutional court, no in the constitution, we have seen just only three times mentionings about the labour rights.

INT02   41:19
Jesus.

INT03   41:25
Very limited right, but they expand the definition under the Labour Protection Acts. But again the the wording that they use in these two piece of registration just only like to ensure that the company will provide the adequate, you know, wage.
For the for for maintain well-being of the workers. So this is not equivalent to the living wage or fair wage. So this kind of you know practice still reflect the the concern of many country that how Thailand can incorporate the concept of living wage.
Ensure, you know, the rights of worker and the rights to well-being of these people, you know, in long run.

INT02   42:11
Satya, can I just make one one comment on the constitution as well? We so the election this week was for two things, one to elect the ruling party and parliamentarians, but also it was a referendum on whether or not to amend the constitution. And so the constitution current constitution was written in 2017.
Under Uh by the military government, right? And can you correct me if I say something incorrect here? It was written by the military government. It's an extensively lengthy constitution which continues to, you know, be a fundamental Uh part of how Uh.
Uh, the the influencing people's daily, you know, freedom and opportunity, I would say. Um.
There is is an opportunity now because the referendum results, though not yet fully counted, uh, shows that people are in favour of amending the Constitution. And even as of the, you know, headlines this morning, the Uh party that is likely therefore to take up government and become the ruling party because they've won the election.
Say, well, now we must move forward. The people have spoken. We have to amend the Constitution.
However, we will not touch the elements within that constitution that speak to, uh, some of the parts of our system, including His Majesty and so on. So upfront, you know, we have a referendum that asks to be with the Constitution. The answer is yes.
And the party is saying, OK, but we're only going to do this part of it, not that part of it. And I think that comes from, you know, speaks to what happened, I think in 2023 as well when more progressive parties pressed for parts of the constitution related to this, not to be reformed and there was an immediate push back on that and so.
I I I'm reading today in terms of how the the new government would approach this and it's with a lot of caution, but there is a commitment to do so. Um, and that's positive. So when we think of, you know, labour laws, when we think of the fact that.
Thailand is going through OECD accession is, you know, seeking to have free trade agreements with Uh other countries and that that's an opportunity to shift some practices. I am curious to see how that could manifest in some Um.
Uh, positive way forward in whatever constitutional amendments or or changes take place in the coming years.

Santiago Pardo   44:37
OK, something that I am liking a lot from this interview is that all your answers allow me to ask for different rights. So this is nice. Do you? I mean, you already gave for me a lot of assets about the labor rights.
Do you want to add some others challenge in terms of labor rights? According to our data, the labor rights has declined compared to 2020. So this is very a very key topic for us.

INT02   44:59
Mm.
Interesting. I mean, I I I would be interested to to see on the basis of what they've declined. I mean, I'm not not at all challenging that, right. But maybe Penny, it'd be good to hear your perception perception of how they declined. I do want to say one positive thing that's happened, Santiago.
Um, so in the last year, so since August, the cabinet has made a decision to allow migrant workers living in the long term shelters on the Myanmar border the right to work. Now one can argue that this was made very pragmatic.

INT03   45:44
Mm.

INT02   45:47
Because it happened at the same time that as the the borders closed with Cambodia and there was a dearth in in available workers. Um.
And and that may or may not be true, right? But what is certainly true is that the Thailand is starting to step up um on its commitment to try and resolve what has been very long standing challenge on the on the Myanmar border in terms of how to.
Support, empower, help repatriate the the the people living in in shelters. So now there is a big process underway to try and match those 80,000 or so working.
Age persons living in the camps with opportunities. Um, if they do this, they will be genuinely one of the countries in the world that actually tried to put in place a longer term solution for long standing Uh migrants slash asylum slash.
As in we use the phrase people living in camps quite intentionally, right? Uh, not calling them migrants or refugees because that ascribes a certain legal or economic status. So um, they it genuinely will be a good story in in a kind of global context where there aren't many good stories about countries stepping.
Up to try and put in place some more long term solutions for situations like this. So I I do think even if the broader context has reduced, I do think Thailand deserves recognition of that step and even if it was a step that was brought forward because the US pulled out funding from the camps, which they did.

INT03   47:15
Mm.

INT02   47:30
Because there was a gap in migrant workers, because of the Cambodian border, which there was nonetheless, Thailand could have chose to do differently or to just leave things in status quo. And they didn't. They made, I think, a very progressive decision to allow those people to leave the camps to work. And I think it's a basis for a lot of other positive.
Dialogues that have gone right to the top of the political agenda in Thailand. So that I think is a very, very, very positive step forward. Kunpini, do you want to come in on anything else in terms of the the perception that things have gone back?

INT03   48:04
Sure, sure needs maybe. Yeah, just sharing my perspective on the challenging, you know, challenges, issues facing, you know, Thailand on when it's come to the labor rights protections, right. I think, you know, during the past few year there are many forms and new forms and emerging forms.
Of labor violation, you know, facing the country, for example, the increasing of the informal sector. We just have a look at the ILO study conduct last year, right. They mentions that you know the informal sector.
The numbers of of these worker in this sector now is account over 50% of the total worker which is like surprisingly so yeah, so when this come to the informal sector, you know right that after the worker wouldn't be able to receive any social protections or benefit. So these are still a critical concern.
You know for for Thailand how we can register this worker into the legal system so they can get a proper welfare and benefits. And another new forms of violation that we have seen, you know a lot this day is about is happening because of the social media and online platform, right.
You might have heard about the victims from trafficking to the online scam center. Thailand is actually now become the the the the hub of you know this movement. So over here we we just received you know the funding from the donor to to do the project called Finance Against Rivery and Trafficking.
So in Asia, Thailand was selected to be the first country, you know, to implement these projects because they can see that a lot of transitions of the victim, you know, happening in Thailand and then, you know, they they were deceived.
To work in some place, right? And then they end up in the scam center operation to do this. And in this project we work with the financial institution like the bank, insurance company, financial credit agency to track.
You know that illicit financial flow and also help them to set up the system to screen any risks associated to violations. So it's quite interesting on this projects and apart from that a new forms of violation I would say it's happened with the.
Platform worker. So similar to the informal sector, right, these people we we have seen a lot in Thailand, the operations of the delivery service, you know, for for riding, for delivering, delivering goods and services.
So these people, they call themselves as a freelance worker. You know, we still have no concrete laws to protect them from from the violations and they haven't received a benefit because there there is no, you know, the the entrepreneur, right?
That could provide a benefit to these freeland workers. So still critical issue for Thailand, how we can come up with the protection for this kind of service and another factors I think is about the transition, you know to the automation. So as you know, right, Thailand heavily realized.
on the labor intensive productions in the past, but now because of the, you know, the comings of automation, the AI, the machine, so the company facing, you know, the process of transition to to that.
Period. So many workers if they cannot adjust with this, you know the new skill, so they will need to lose job and then the company might take you know the opportunity to to you know to have the unfairness not so.
Dismissal to the company, to to the worker. So we have seen such a case because we also work with the worker who who will harass from the company and you know some of them they say like oh they end up you know losing that contract and didn't get any remedy or compensation.
Yeah, by having the argument from the company that they cannot fulfill the requirement anymore without the proper training to the worker. So that had been the case for Thailand. So that's it for me. I hope I kept covers of many factors on the challenging part.

INT02   52:33
Yeah, and I think it comes back to this question of a informality and B lack of means of redress across the board and the more uncertain the international.
Landscape is on, you know how, what kind of predictable nature of work environment is. The more we talk about a green transition, a digital transition, the A I transition, the more you know workers are in a vulnerable position if they don't have those skills. I think there is data as well that talks about the the amount of hours.
Invested in learning and capacity development of workers in Thailand compared to workers in other countries. I think it's way, way below the OECD standard, suggesting that it's the, you know, workers are vulnerable. Essentially, they're not being retooled, retrained or, you know, constantly.
Fascinated to manage the complexity that that lies ahead.
Santiago, I'm so sorry. I'm gonna have to go. I know we've hit the 9:30. I don't know if you've got like a last one minute, uh, question.

INT03   53:38
Mm.

Santiago Pardo   53:41
Yes, actually. Thank you very much. I have only one last question and this is for you both and basically is the is the wrap up question. Yeah. Could you please give us your assessment of the status of fundamental rights in Thailand?
In one sentence.

INT02   54:05
I can say a story of two halves, lots improving on paper.
On the one hand and and Oh my gosh, in one sentence, I don't know. Yeah, it's a it's a conflicting story.
Simultaneous progress and regression.

INT03   54:30
It's it's difficult to come up with one sentence, but from my side I think it's the mixed picture.


