INTERVIEW CODE 7


Marta Basystiuk   2:12
That's very helpful. And again, thank you for your work and for taking your time to share your perspective and expertise in this field. I always like to start with the what I call icebreaker question and it's rather broad, so please feel free to.
Reply broadly or more specifically, I think this will help me to then follow up with other more specific questions. So the question that I always start with is asking your opinion if you can share your assessment of the current state of fundamental rights in Thailand and if you can give us some examples of specific.
Specific developments that you think are particularly important for us to know that would be also very helpful.

INT09   2:55
I yeah. So I I think on the fundamental rights, particular on the fundamental freedoms, freedom of expressions and and I I think it's been quite known that like they have.
From OK for for me from the trends like if we compared like 10 years ago after like just right after the coup, definitely things are getting better on certain perspective, but I think they have still have a very.
Um.
So like in term like they help, I think they help a little bit wider civic engagement form like last with the last governments and the last parliaments that the civil society and even individuals.
Feel that they're able to participate and influence some certain policies and laws and can explain their opinions, but things get a little bit tightened with with certain aspect of the story that if they can.
Put it out like for example if they able they're not likely not able to criticize anything that related to the loyal families anymore which is this compared to right before the protest in that happened like in 2020 and.
And of and and they bring it back off the section 112 the list matches in 2021. So I think the section 112 under the criminal code the list matches there is I think I I think it's K pay quite like a key part that make.
Um, suppress, um, the criticisms that relates anything that relates to the loyal family, including like a budgeting um project with like government projects or things like that is um that make us uh.
Quite smaller in that perspective that like is like less people will be talk about that and but definitely people still able to feel more comfortable to talk about the government and all other perspective. So I think they have a little bit of discriminatory practice with the thing that.
The state are taking to the expressions with like they are just choose the thing that they feel that is a national security threat as really that if it related to the loyal family. So I I and I think that is a pretty much the thing that is still quite difficult to move even within.
From even with with my experience that working with OSHR with the Thai government, even we have a good color counterpart at the Thai Ministry of Justice, it's still something that they not actually able to say it or to work on it even we say and it will be like a dead end kind of things. So I.
And I think that that will be the issue that will be hard to move like even with like a five year or 10 years. So basically those like politicals, political prisoners like the the political activists who've been detained with the section 112 right now they will, they will be difficult to be.
Release or like we give the amnesty for for this and with the the upcoming elections I not much seeing any much hope on on that they will be put forward on this agenda anymore because it's been been suppressed to hold like with the Constitutional Court with the political party and.
And nobody is talking about it. So I think this is will be the very main like um difficult issue for for Thailand to move forward while compared to others. I I feel while compared to others um the political.
Um, charges that against the political activists like those sections 116 on Cedic Cedic Cedictions or like even the on the shots and the emergency decree of the COVID-19. I think those have been more the area that.
Able to get more like, yeah, it's probably easier to this negotiate for like the amnesty and be released. Yeah. Why the Section 112 is like little bit like very difficult in the even even the like a justice process because first.
Is anyone can be in flag complaint against anyone on a section 112 and secondly I think what it's been shown before the court likely if it's under section 112 they they.
They go beyond like the burden of proof. They're gonna be like they they doesn't apply the your listenable job in terms like if you actually commit that things they they can like for example like.
If they are being charged with the session one or two with the post of like in the Facebook post, they have one case of being documented by the lawyer and we also document in ours our usual documentations. They have a one Facebook post and then like the court doesn't when when as the.
With net examinations, the court not actually verify with her, but is is actually this person posting it? They were just like, is it your Facebook? Yes. OK, then you're posting.
And that is how they use like they and they don't not necessarily they they didn't use any digital forensics to show like oh this is actually your IP at the time this is actually your IP at like you're postings. So they not have certain thing like that they will be like.
OK this this your post or even how they the definitions around the sections 112 actually is protect just like the current king. Now they are borders that if that other implementations of the section 112 to like even the former king like.
King Lama Knight or even the king in like I don't know like in the 1000 years ago in like our history that like if you talk about it, if you discard about this, it's will this they feel like this is will be undermine the loyal family institutions.
Yeah, even it's like good faith or like a sincere or even it's like a fact or like the budget that they use, they will not take as a fact. They will take everything is as like criticisms and that is undermine the loyal family. So you will be violated section 112.
So I think in this particular thing is really very limited why compared to other sections if you we go to see the on the court decision on other sections like section 116 or even in the emergency decree or the violations of public SMB act that do to like.
Do like like during the COVID-19 you you can see the very reasonable like decision that made by the court that like all there is not have enough everything to show like this person are in the protest for example or like not if not we need to show that they are in the organized like organizer of the protest.
For example, so we can see the where we that both standard in the event in the justice system for the case that forward to this for the particular sections on the XP on 112. So that is like.
Pretty much, actually, pretty much summarily on the fundamental freedom, especially on the freedom of expressions. But on the on the other hand, for me, freedom. Oh, sorry.
Freedom. Oh, sorry.

Marta Basystiuk   10:51
Oh, take your time.
It's OK Skype. We can we can pause if you need to pause.

INT09   10:58
Yeah, no, it's just help. Something happened to in my laptop. OK, OK, I think it's good now, so.

Marta Basystiuk   11:03
You gave actually a great overview to be honest, and it's perfectly matches with what we've been hearing from very different experts who are also referring to the times before the coup and they are saying that if you take a step back and want to analyze the.
Developments over the past 10 years, yes, you will see the improvements, but at the same time you still need to understand what's happening right now because there there there is, let's put it this way, there is room for improvement, especially when it comes to different political matters and you are basically said the same. Can I quickly just double check because I didn't.
Catch the the name of the law that you referred to. You named Section 112. What is the law?

INT09   11:44
Yeah.
Is the Les Majeste charge Les Majeste?

Marta Basystiuk   11:49
Oh, that's my just date.
This is like a separate law. This is the name of the law, right?

INT09   11:56
Is the under the criminal court? Uh, penal court, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   11:59
OK. OK. Thank you. I'm hearing this a lot and I was not sure whether that's the phrase, the common phrase used, but now I know it's the law. OK. You've mentioned a couple of very important for us types of rights or freedoms.
Namely, you spoke about freedom of expression, assembly and association. And I'd like to ask you some more specific question if you're OK with that. Yep. OK. So with respect to freedom of expression, we are seeing some differences between what the expert says.
And what the general public believes, in particular experts, they tend to think that the situation has worsened in recent years. Thank you so much. And at the same time, general public, they they reported some improvements.
And I was wondering what is your assessment, whether you are on the side of the public or on the side of the experts and if you can provide us the reasons for that, it would be great. And then if you can also tell us what you think.
Are the reasons why we are seeing the divergence. We also would like to know that if you if you.

INT09   13:10
So, so either side of the expert is we don't. Could you repeat the the side of the public? Could you repeat that question? Yeah, sorry.

Marta Basystiuk   13:18
Yeah, absolutely, absolutely. So, so the experts, they think that there is an improvement when it comes to the exercise of the freedom. I'm sorry, vice versa, the general public believes that there is an improvement.
When they exercise the freedom of expression. And then experts are saying that actually, in their opinion, this freedom has weakened over the last couple of years. I was wondering whose side you are on and why.

INT09   13:43
Mhm.
So I yeah, my my read will be same as the other expert because it's really on the couple of this years.
Like after like, yeah, especially after couple of like the two or three years first I think.
I I would say first they still have pending legislations that the last government tried to enact it is the on the to is non-profit organization law which is they try to give a burden of rough.
To the the all NGOs or like civil society in terms of like reportings and have a more shot on that. But that is still a draft. But the the good thing without it is haven't been out. It's still a draft. They have a lot of push back and I think.
But they have that they have that's still ongoing. Secondly, um.
If even even about assembly associate and association actually on the assembly, I will go with the assembly first. So with the assembly I will say they have like the police.
Who is the crowd control police with facilitating assembly? I think they get a bit better in the in the sense of facilitate the protest compared to things that happened in 2021.
They get a thing with a little bit better. They are facilitating, but the number of the cases that been filed to campaign against the protesters and as a while, while violations of the Public SMB Act.
It's still pretty much there and most of most of the protests that we are monitoring, if they are still in protest or they are go to protest in front of like the government, government, Government House, all of them likely to get the shot under violations under the Public Assembly Act.
So I think on that part is that soon is kind of get a little bit worse on the same that like now they put chat for most of the protesters fight even on the protest there things look very complete normal like.
Oh, OK, they can sit here and there, but then after that they will be get a notice and then they will get a court notifications that like oh they are getting charges on on these cases and that is make things a little bit actually a little bit difficult for for the network actually on the grassroots.
Network who will come to protest and bargain a lot of policy for their own like for their own grassroot communities actually on like indigenous people. So they they need to take turn and take because when you've been charged with like variations of public XMB act it will be difficult.
For them as well for the next time to come to be the organizer and and notified to the police. So so I think that scenario is is will be just very undermined the movement in the country because they will just.
It's just one by one getting the charge, these charges and the the lawsuit in the court will be take our time, take a resources for them and you and most of the protests right now in Bangkok, they are like out come from like outside of Bangkok to come to protest at the government house because they want to talk with the government.
Basically so things are like they these will be undermined a lot on the movement and the bargaining form from from the peoples I think from the civil society and the movement side of it that.
That is will be for for me for the assembly part and the associations. I think this is I would say first as they have they have a draft NGO law and the trend right now with like a scamming centers and the money launderings.
I think the Gulf Thai government and Thai state at a state, I think they pretty much see binding things together. It's like we just scamming center issues and time and need on dreams and the associations so.
I I think they want to scrutinize a bit on like how to the the register association work because some of it also at risk to to subject to the entire money launderings for the scamming centers and also another story.
Will be at risk that for the subject to support the terrorisms which is they are see they asked to foresee things that conflict in the South is will be ongoing and happenings yeah.
And for the the last two, last three years, the the police process in the South, so it doesn't go anywhere. It's still quite far more or less as the same that they still have a conflict on like the government will not say conflict, OK, we say unrest situation on.
Going in the South border provinces. So I think how they want to scrutinize, how the association work, I think those agendas still there and one of the law have been actually there was going to pass but because the parliament is the so first is that.
Anti money amendment to anti money laundering app, which is they will impose a a further financial burden report for the NGO who received a foreign fund. Yeah, yeah, but it's now that the bill is lapsed because the parliament is dissolved.
But we but with the trend that like for they have around scamming center that they want to deal with and also the second is the government Thailand want to be part of the Asia Pacific.
Our Thailand's going to be review mutual assessment with the Asia Pacific's, the APC that that they need to apply to the regulation of the financials, Fat F the financials.
I, I don't even want a full name. I'll name the acronym the financial tax force. Yes. Yeah. About money on money laundering and quarter tourism. So I think they have big motivations to to scrutinize the association. So I think with with this trend that we are seeing I I quite.

Marta Basystiuk   20:36
Yes.

INT09   20:49
I make sure that things will get a little bit lougher for for the movement to to grow or like to for the association to be able establish and even now like it's also already difficult for for a movement to actually become like a register CSO register.
Register NGO to to work like and like by by law, yeah. And and some of the politics, if some of the politic also pay part because usually the legislations of the NGO is under the Ministry of Interiors and.
For the whole two years, the Ministry of Interia has been governed by Kum Jai Thai parties, which is they are more see as a conservative parties and so they pretty much feel like they pretty much been.
And people feel like they are a bit under control of the conservative side. So they not have actually like me having more like a resistive on on that and even even now that's why they don't have a new law yet.
On the NGO we still get some report by the CSO colleague that some time to time they will choose the NGO that quite like vocal on on the politics or like or like for example on the constitutional amendment or or.
Or things that they are on not on things that are working that it's more work hold and against the government that will be come to time they will come to ask for checking for like audit things report and things which is they can do under the law but they just chose to do with a certain NGO. It's not like oh we will do.
Because this is the and no auditing you know. So I think that that make people feel that they are being target rather than that it's like oh it's a transparency process for the for the NGO to to do it. So I I would say in in that.
That in in this two year I I feel they have some certain.
Gap that people can be exercised, but most of some of it is that soon. Yeah, it's it's seem it's going to be the downhill. That's what from what I feel and also they also have more slap case right now like the such litigations again public participations.
That the case had been filed by the political the politicians, yeah.
Yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   23:26
You mentioned so many interesting points and I I'd like to double check with you. You mentioned the Ministry of Interiors is in charge of NGOs. In what sense do they provide some permits? Are they involved in the registration of NGOs? OK.

INT09   23:42
Yeah. So they are under under the Thai domestic law. So under the Thai domestic law, they have three type of, I would say three type of the NGO. One is the registers in the area under the Ministry of the Human.

Marta Basystiuk   23:43
That's.
Mhm.

INT09   24:00
On social development and human security. So those will like pretty much like like a social service CSO that they register under the social development and human securities. Second, they are this is a type of like most of the foundations and associations which is registered under the Ministry of.
Which is they will be the one who oversight and also give a permit legislation checking all the document. Yeah and it usually takes quite really long time. I I think the the the last one that I know that I know among.

Marta Basystiuk   24:31
See.

INT09   24:40
I would like my this and probably this. I don't have this documentation this document things. This is more like what I'm know from other people. I think they take up like at least like one years to to register like after the day that they are submitting all document that.
All document have been ready. They take around one year to register and the last type is register under the Ministry of Labour which is this more on like the private international NGO that there will be like they are they are registered already outside of the country and they want to.
To some actually inside the country then they able to register under the Ministry of Labor and it is more like a visa purpose like a work permits purpose. Yeah but so so most of the association in Thailand and found like CSO in Thailand foundation if they register it will be registered.
The Ministry of Interior.

Marta Basystiuk   25:39
Just to be clear, because every country has rules to set up different organizations in Thailand, those institutions, they do have, as you mentioned, oversight controls over how those NGOs operate in Thailand. Is it correct? OK.

INT09   25:43
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   25:56
This is new and very important to understand how how easy it is to set up a geo and then to participate and overall when we think about civic participation because we have one indicator like aggregated indicator that is called civic participation and our data show.
That in civic participation there have been some gains. Then when we break down this indicator into a smaller elements like freedom of expression, a freedom of assembly and association, then we are seeing less positive picture.
But if we think more broadly in terms of civic participation, would you have like a positive stance on how things are developing? Would you say that there are some effective channels through which?
General population can actually influence the decisions that are being made by different state state agencies.

INT09   26:56
Mm.

Marta Basystiuk   26:58
What is your perception?

INT09   27:02
I yeah, let me.

Marta Basystiuk   27:04
If it's if you don't feel comfortable, we will skip and move on.

INT09   27:08
Yeah, no, I'm just things. So even just look as like I'm the part of this context and like, yeah, I feel many people are being so OK.
I think they have a two to five. I would say like they have like 122 things on this. One is.
I feel the civics participation in the sense of like like people come to try to influence the government policies or even like with the local governments. If we are seeing very big pictures like if don't talk like I I think things I get a little bit.
Like I think people are more participate right now, but I think one of the factor is because this is some of, I would say this is some of the result of the pro democracy protest in 2021.
So people are feel engaged with like the political issues. Why? I think before the coup and during the under the Punta government time, people feel less engaged with the political issues.
So with the more people are being interest in the political issues after the pro democracy protest in 2021, I think is make things can be able to obviously see that people are more engaged with the politicals.
And policies with the government policies. Yeah, I like check, call, check and balance, you know, like criticize the government policy and how they should do it. So. So I think that one of the one of one of the factor that make it like in the bigger pictures, I think we see really active citizens.

Marta Basystiuk   28:45
And like that, perfect.

INT09   29:03
And doing like the participate on on this secondly with with and also with that I think with the last composition last parliament composition they the the progressive party which is the currently now is a people parties.
As like I'm known as a Progressive Party, they got got like they got a lot of seat in the parliaments. So I think the the parliament Chanel entry points is quite kind of open wider to.
For the people able to participate and influence and you know send things things and including the CSO I and I think I I can see that for these 2-3 years that they have a lot of entry point at or even with the other.
Like even the just the people they are able to, you know, able to send things, able to talk and those are things. But when they are sending things, most of it happened online in on the online space actually, but I think they have.
Many active like member of parliament who've been engaged with the people even online for like this cut on the policy and how to decide the law, things like that. Yeah, so that I think that component make the civics participation really like more wider.

Marta Basystiuk   30:17
Yeah.

INT09   30:26
And also another factor I would say they also have a from my observations from like outside of Bangkok now like I think they also have a lot of CS also working with the grassroots movement.
And they are more empowered to active on their own to on actually on the conflicting with like with the development project that's coming to into that area. So I think we see a lot of small, small scale.
Assembly gathering or protestings with the local government in like outside of Bangkok like that is happened quite often and then they're quite actively to do it. So I think those cases at those.
Those who also like have been seen to be able to empower to engage themselves with like with the local government to influence like things that happen in their own area. So so so I would say like that if we see a big picture definitely yeah but yeah if if if thing go.

Marta Basystiuk   31:30
Perfect.

INT09   31:36
Go in the in the trap on particulars. So I I feel like they have a white like the the the current picture is great but from what I yeah but from what I see is like a is the downhill of the trend. This trend is like probably going down. Yeah but it's great right now.

Marta Basystiuk   31:55
Thank you. Yes.

INT09   31:56
If like it improved right now, yes, yeah. And on, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   31:59
Thank you. I just, yeah, I'm sorry for interrupting. I just caught myself on a mistake and I want to make sure that I'm not misleading you in any way. Actually, civic participation according to our data is declining. It's my mistake. I just.
Looked at the general trend for access to information, but you are on point with what other experts have mentioned that in general civic space have become more open. But there are some things, as you also mentioned, that are.
Causing the chilling effect, for instance when it comes to social media that you have this criminal computer criminal act. So you have to be cautious as to what you are commenting on or as you mentioned, excellent example on.
Facebook post, Facebook on the post. I'm just thinking about Face Facebook for some reason. So sorry, I just wanted to make it very clear and it was my mistake. I would also ask you about, if you don't mind about equality. You mentioned that there are some groups who are facing more risks.
Than the others. And unfortunately our data also points to declining confidence in equal treatment under the law. And I was curious whether you agree with that assessment and what are the main challenges when it comes to equal treatment or discrimination in general?
Yeah.

INT09   33:28
Before we go to the equality, can I add one more on the access to information? Yeah, yeah and and.

Marta Basystiuk   33:31
Absolutely. Oh, please, yes. Oh, yes. If you can start with what is your stance on access to information, that would also be a good because according to our data, general public is saying that it's easier to access information from governments and it's easier to understand this information. Do you agree?

INT09   33:38
Yeah.
Yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   33:51
Or not?

INT09   33:52
Um.
I so I OK.
OK. I think if compared to like 10 years.
I will be that.
Some information from the government like government document is easier to access online.
But I wouldn't say that this is accessible for everyone. Yeah, yeah, and.

Marta Basystiuk   34:20
OK.
Because of the access to Internet or what is the underlying factor?

INT09   34:25
Yeah, so we um.

Marta Basystiuk   34:29
Is it like a rock?

INT09   34:30
Mainly it will. Mainly it will be. They have two, so they have two effects. OK, so mainly it will be.
I I think if we like we are the working level like why we we we kind of know that OK where we to go to see the information pieces but it's will not easy for just general public to know.
Where they are going to get those information. That's why that information are in public. You know what I mean? Like they they need to know how to search, they need to know which government website, they need to know why is it. They need to know what particular reporting they are looking for for like certain information.

Marta Basystiuk   35:04
Yes.

INT09   35:16
But I I would say this on the context on the especially on the context of those who the movement that are working in the.
With the for the development project as well. So in the before they have development projects come into place in the area, usually they do like you know environmental impact assessment, environmental and health impact assessments. So if if it happened like 10 years ago or the document of like what is.
have like the project documents what is happening the explanation they probably already like put it in like you know that district office for them to okay look and and see but now of the practice is they will say like they put it some online and with a lot of like elderly people
Like older people in in the areas, many people don't know where to go, like how they do it and some people not might not have actually like the beautiful smartphone that they can read and they can do. If you imagine the project document like them about the development project information that probably come into like.
Usually they will come to like 50 pages, so nobody is going to read. So I would say the access to information in the sense of the accessibility and making is accessible for people to unlike the affected people, affected population to actually understand what is happening. I don't think it's too bad.
And and also for in the process for the EIA report after like they do consultation, usually they will have the EIA report or EHIA report those you have to pay to get it. So for example if you want to know what happened.

Marta Basystiuk   37:03
We.

INT09   37:06
Like what happened right now? Like, OK, are we going to get this project in the our area? Are we going to affect it? I'm going to be evicted or not. They have to go to pay at the government to request the government to give.
The the report. So I think that it's still not easy access for for many, many, many people, yeah. But of course it is like if you're talking about more like a general informations, yeah, it's it's definitely easier because the government are more.
Digital rights, like digitalizations right now in for for like, OK, they will put the policy, they will put one or two reporting on this, yeah. And that's yeah and.
And yeah, so that's that's would be for, yeah, for me, yeah, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   38:01
Access the information. Yep, perfect. And what about the equality?

INT09   38:06
OK, the equalities. Um, I I would say, um, um, definitely some. OK, I would say.
Thailand doesn't have, not just. Thailand doesn't have the comprehensive anti discrimination law.
And the culin law that we have right now, we have the Gender Equality Act and you may see a positive thing, the Marriage Equality Act. And also we have the promotions of leaving of people with disabilities.
Yeah. And the new app that's just been an app right before the parliament is so is the the protections of the way of life of the ethnic group like which is the indigenous people, so.
I I would see like this. I would see at this perspective actually. I think even they have a good law, but I thought if you can see.
Things most of the non-discrimination work for Thai government, they are focused on promoting like the promotion part of the right like they are more comfortable to give you know support of like OPD who working on like promotions or like.
The empowerment projects to the people with disability, which is good, but I think a lot of group are being left behind because they are being discriminated but they don't know where to go for file the complaints when they want to seek the protections.
So, so I know that like they have the CSO tried to push forward on the like a comprehensive anti-discrimination report, anti-discrimination act to the parliament. So set up the complaint mechanism to.
To receive to for for those of the group that been left behind to able to able to seek the protections. So I think the protections and the complaint mechanisms still lack all for for many affect populations and group and.
And with and even now with with.
Some affected populations, for example indigenous people, even now they have a new law, but because the law is pretty new, so things nothing not yet like improving instantly, they're still being affected.
I think one of the issues will be the head test and also.
In discriminates at like because they are in the different like they are ethnic minorities, they are indigenous people and and that the hate test that is happened shown a lot in like all lies or harassment.
Against like either the indigenous people who are actually quite vocal on talking things or those who are ethnic minority, especially on the religious minorities in the Salvador province, it's like for we saw a lot of like.
Activists are like the CSO were on the Salvador province and they are the religious minority themselves. They will often get a lot of the online comment that attacked to every post it. They will have someone to attack on that.
So I think the first the the hate narrative is still that and the second they a lot of indigenous people they are they not able to access to the land right because many of them.
Like when when the property laws being enacted in Thailand, they basically didn't be able to entitle to to be granted the land property and a lot of them also still live in the forest that are being declared as the National Park or the preserved.
That forest. So that is also come on the effect that a lot of cases that they've been charged on the hand pressings they obtain will be charging with the indigenous people and a lot land and and even the pollutions, the air pollution that happens in.
In in Thailand actually on they have like a PM 2.5 now people always have the some stereotypes and I think don't stigmatize of the indigenous people that they are the one who causing the pollution because they live in the forest. They are the one who burned the forest.
So that is a court pollution which is there is no where in the any other research let's saying that is like come from just only the forest alone and I think that's that is the the that narratives to that and for.
Another group I was mentioned is the migrant worker that those with the status. I think they still have a lot of discriminatory practice in term of like access to the remedies or when they are going to the healthcare, they still are being treated differently with.
With that old status like because all they are American worker, if they're not pay, I'm not gonna give you any healthcare access. Why in the Thai law are more guarantees on the universal healthcare, you know and also and but but.
But they have, they put some limitation for the migrant worker to be able to access to the healthcare or and so I think the migrant workers still pretty much being at status that will be discriminated and now with the Thai Cambodian conflict.
And also a year last year they also have the a lot like they already have a Myanmar in flight to Thailand, but I think the narrative of anti migrant that is like happened around the world.

Marta Basystiuk   44:27
Yeah.

INT09   44:28
It also happened in Thailand too. So that is make um I think my gun worker or even refugees who come is make them more like have a difficult living uh living here and now um those and highs.
And time again sentiment in online space also sometime like time to time they also convert like they are become the physical things because like for example actually from for this January.
Yeah, since January they have, they have a group that like, you know, go to the migrant worker areas and try. It's like a Thai people are like grappling to go to the where the migrant worker live to threaten them and like ask the police to come and check their identity.
Entity like oh if you're not legal if you are live here illegally you out. Yeah and this is like happened pretty much on the narrative of anti migrations and and it's more it's more intense when is they have like Thai Cambodian border conflict that is have have ongoing and happening.
So like that will take target anyone who is a Cambodian and now they target most of like the the might can actually like most Myanmar, Cambodian or Laos. Yeah. So that will be a second group on the third group on the LGBT. Actually I would say they are.
Better in other way, but I think they have the certain group who like if we are see gender as the intersectionalities, some certain group that they are being slowly or typing by binding with the LGBT, for example the sex workers, people who live in the ex plane of HIV.
And also people who are excellent using drug those will be the the the group that they always tied that identity with the LGBT group people and and I think those are they are hyping doesn't much help in like especially when.
Like they have a case like when they have a cases to you know when the access to justice and then and actually I think those the people of using drug are way get the really taboo in in the communities and also in the justice system and I and I even now I believe.
If that if you go to the statistic of the Ministry of Justice, I think most of the prisoners uh we did that often charge and then they are way out and they are way back to the prison. So that's that will be the the the main group that most mostly I think I would say they are most.
This community let out out of the community to be able to indicate in and also will be certainly our type thing with a certain genders and certain group of people. Yeah that is will be.

Marta Basystiuk   47:30
Japat, that's super useful and very extensive. So thank you so much because you were replying and I'm like, OK, I I don't have to ask any more questions about the complaint mechanism. And you touched upon a couple of issues that are related to property and labor rights, but we are almost at time. So I just wanted to check in and ask you if you're OK with asking.
One more question about the labor rights or if you are busy and you'd like to wrap up this conversation, it's perfectly fine for us. We want to make sure that we respect your time and that you are comfortable.

INT09   48:02
Yeah, yeah, I still have have have time if yeah, I'm still OK, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   48:07
Perfect. Then I will just quickly ask you about the labour rights and I'm looking at the data and I'm seeing that Thailand's performance on labour rights has declined in since 2020 and.
At the same time, when we separately look at what general public is saying, we are seeing that a large majority of workers, 87% actually, they say that they are free to form unions, free to negotiate with employers, different working conditions.
From your experience, what is your general assessment of the state, the state of labour law in Thailand and what do you think are the main developments that explain either the overall decline that we are seeing or you agree with the general public and?
Are seeing some positive developments in that regard. You've already mentioned about the the groups that are maybe that unfortunately to them rules are applied a little bit differently. So migrants, indigenous people.

INT09   49:03
Yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   49:16
LGBT community. Who else am I missing? Santiago.

INT09   49:22
Yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   49:23
So I'm very grateful for those examples. That's exactly what we want to know. But in general, do you feel like there is a a better treatment of citizens in Thailand and for them the rules might be different and better? If so, just it would be great to know whether that's.

INT09   49:42
Thank you.

Marta Basystiuk   49:43
What you believe?

INT09   49:45
Yeah, um, on the label, right?
OK, because I'm not, I'm not work a lot on the label, right? But OK, I I will give my perspective. I'm like I work with a certain group in the discrimination areas, so I understand.
I understand that the labour protections is improved in the law, like the law is improved because we, you know we are extended on the labour laws on the maternity leave and things like that. Also I think definitely with the citizens they feel more improved in the sense that we get.
A little bit of the better level protections.
Protections.
Yeah, I would say yes for that. Uh, but I think the practical and realities things to um.
I didn't have like a fee form to negotiate with the.
Um.
With negotiate with with the employees I think I I we see certain situations that been like you know been chair online and like I I think some of like.
Some of the labour unions still able to to you know to to access to internal like negotiation process with the employee which is yes but I I but we still also see that a lot of.
Labour union have like probably have to like have to I I think the good good of this is like some of the cases that they cannot negotiate they able to get access to the complaint like getting things go to the court.
For us for door protection. So I I, I I see this as the same phenomenal if like if you are Thai, but things will be as I say, I think will be get a little bit at complete different story if you are my current worker. Yeah. And yeah, so.

Marta Basystiuk   51:53
Sounds perfect. Yeah, that's perfect. Yeah. Um.

INT09   51:56
Yeah, but on the oh sorry, but just just give you a a few goof that in the labour market that it will be difficult for them to to be accessed is of course people with disabilities now they have despite in the law they have putting the quota.
They obtain being being put in the work that are important based by like you know for example we they will feel like oh there are people with disabilities so like they should just do only this certain work. So then the company kind of like tick box OK.
We are hiding the people with with disabilities. Why on the but actually people with disability they might able to do others like high skill work but they will not been seen like that. Yeah. Second on the people living with the HIV.
Um, we got a lot of cassette that.
That been reported to us that they are, which is is really, really difficult for us to do anything, but we we get into the conversation with the group that they obtained asked by the company to check the HIV AIDS.
Before entry to the companies and when the results show that they have that they've been refused to to accept to work. Yeah, as it will be another group, yeah. And of course those who have criminal back out is really on the drug offense.
They will be cut out from this scenario because yeah first and for most of the application they will ask you to shake the criminal the court. Yeah and if you have on on this they it will be if I I think likely they will not have any chance to get into to work.
And that is make those group go back to the cycle that they need to you know go to sell that again or being sick worker again and then go back to the prison come out and then the the vicious cycle happens. So that I think that is also the the another group that we can see.
And last one will be, I think LGBT in workplace actually on trans, I think transgenders they still like specifically on trans. I think it's like they still sometime will come to time be discriminated because they they are not what people are expected.
That's that's we have some some report documenting that we have, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   54:28
Thank you so much. Very valuable examples. Santiago, do you have any questions or you're OK with me moving to the closing of our conversation? Yep. OK. So I have two very quick question. One is.
Broadly, do you think there is anything that we haven't discussed, but you think it's very important for us to know when it comes to our analysis of fundamental rights in Thailand? You can think about the list of questions that I sent you or in general if there is any.
Either type of freedom or right or any situation developments that we just need to know any upcoming initiatives, reforms, laws that we just need to know and to integrate.

INT09   55:15
I think one of the thing that I have, yeah, I will. Yeah, just yeah, I I one of the key I think is it like a morbid one like just from what we observe extremely on the torture and then for these plan cases in terms of access to justice.

Marta Basystiuk   55:15
Yeah, you can be very brief. You don't need to expand.

INT09   55:35
If now, because Thailand already have the prevention and submissions on torture and enforcend Act, which is talking on torture and enforcend law, they they did have a couple of cases that go to the court about like torture to date.
Or dead in custody. But what we can be observed is the we didn't see the impact in term like accountability to the state like the states do have the impunity from.
From things actually on torture and info and info and it's actually on the info dispense. So even in in for these plans have been like I think they will hit they will have three-year anniversary this month of like in front of this app.
They still have a lot of cases on in for this plan that not never been so and investigation never been started and I and it's even I think full of a team of even OSHR working with government.
Or even like you know, the victim family also try to send petition to the National Committee of the ACT to try to ask for.
Like invest start investigations or get the actual the the remedies or justice for them seeking justice for them is very like silent less more like even we know for the fact like for example our counterpart Ministry of Justice who have been the secretariat of of the.
National Committee under the Torture Act. They try very hard to push it forward, but it's very difficult to make it like all the actors, like the Goldman State actor to agree and and I think the enforce plans will be the key that like things.
Like we we can see like most of people will work, like most of the government agency when they come to torture and advancement work, they will work on like like easy getaway cases, you know, like.
For example, oh, when they talk about dead in custody, we will be, they will be like, oh, there's a people charged with the drug offense offense and then they are being arrested in the police station. They die and like we do a very good thing. We do the autopsy, we do things like they will use that example, but they will have other a lot of cases that.
Been unsold because it's difficult to sell, because it's have a lot of governments, um, being engaged with all militaries have been in that pictures, then those will be difficult to sell. Of course they have slightly improved on like certain.
Cases with like a pirate militaries that like they are there doing like a military trainings. They did have able to bring some the train like military trainer to pin out. Yeah, but most of the questions of the people will be like if the military trainer.
Been pin out like how about their own supervisor will they be pin outed and those is being like you know leftover is only like the trainer will be pin out and things doesn't move anywhere within the military. They still do the same practice.
They like they still do certain practice. We still see the repeated cases that happen. So it's mean actually the case that go to the court doesn't able to prevent things to not happening. Yeah, but we but from our insight in the center we are working with the government of course we see.
Like many actor are trying to to improve this to to being like I would say like the oversight like oversight and checking doing the investigation of the cases like publics for example the Attorney General office I think then I know that they try.
Increase their capacity to work on the cases that more difficult actually on the in participants or even the Ministry of Justice that they are trying to see like any case that that they can help and sort it out and go to talk with the victim families time to time to have the.
Updated information. So I think things we we can see a lot of actor that try to improve the situations but on the same time I I feel with with with the certain K that have like you know really big people involved it will be difficult to get the accountability on that. That's what I think.
That what many people feel, yeah. And we don't need to touch on the corruption that most of everyone in Thailand. If you ask on people on the street, they will say yes, we have option in this country.

Marta Basystiuk   1:00:23
Who doesn't? I mean, there are a few, but very few. Final question, can you please in one sentence say what do you feel? If you need to describe the state of fundamental rights in Thailand in one question, what would it be?

INT09   1:00:26
Yeah.
Yeah.
Question or sentence or sentence? Yeah, yeah, sorry, yeah.

Marta Basystiuk   1:00:45
One sentence. I'm sorry, it's it's it's a bit late in the Washington. That's why I'm yeah, in one sentence.
You can, you can have like a we had a person who basically said 3 words.

INT09   1:00:55
Mhm.

Marta Basystiuk   1:01:02
So it can be a very short sentence.

INT09   1:01:02
Um.
Boredom. This kind of fundamental freedom. Um.
Yeah, this is difficult. Let me think.

Marta Basystiuk   1:01:14
Yeah, my intention was not to put you on the spot, but I did. But our idea while you are thinking about it is to use some of the quotes of of the expert and also integrate them into the report and Santiago knows better maybe in in the communication campaign.

INT09   1:01:18
Yes.

Marta Basystiuk   1:01:34
In how to make this insights more visible to broader public. And we will definitely ask whether you'd like to be acknowledged by name or whether you're OK with us using your sentence anonymously. But that's the intention.

INT09   1:01:52
Hmm.
Can I think and get back to you to e-mail?

Marta Basystiuk   1:01:58
Oh, yeah, if you want to. Yeah, no problem. Yeah. Thank you so very much, Nishapa. It was a great, great pleasure for me. And the fact that you replied positively so quickly found time. I know it's daytime for you and you spend the entire hour with us, I hope.
It was useful for you too in some respect, but I know it was more beneficial for us. So we greatly appreciate that. And yeah, we we hope to stay in touch. And then Santiago, if you want to say like one sentence, no, nothing. It's it's just a bit late and we had a very long working day, but.
We are very grateful and we will stay in touch.

INT09   1:02:38
Thank you so much. Do that for you and wait for read your report.

Marta Basystiuk   1:02:44
Thank you, thank you. And thank you for what you're doing. It's very important as well.

INT09   1:02:50
Thank you. Thank you very much. You too. Have a good night. Bye bye.

Marta Basystiuk   1:02:51
Have a nice day. Yeah. Okay, bye.

